


== Spatial transcriptomics ==
Spatial transcriptomics measures mRNA transcript abundance and distribution in situ across a tissue. Spatial method for RNA in situ detection is first described in a 1969 landmark paper by Joseph G. Gall and Mary-Lou Pardue. Previous to spatial transcriptomics techniques, whole transcriptome profiling lacked spatial context because tissues were ground up in bulk RNA-seq or dissociated into single cells suspensions in single cell RNA-seq. Although some literature refers to "spatial genomics" for RNA, growing consensus has settled on usage of "spatial transcriptomics" or "spatially resolved transcriptomics." 


== Spatial proteomics ==
Spatial proteomics measures the localization and abundance of proteins at the subcellular level across a tissue. Immunohistochemistry-based spatial proteomic methods include oligo barcoded antibodies, cyclic immunofluorescence (cycIF), co-detection by indexing (CODEX), iterative bleaching extends multiplicity (IBEX), multiplexed ion beam imaging (MIBI) and imaging mass cytometry (IMC). Other methods includes deep visual proteomics that profile protein expression in single cells by laser capture microdissection and mass spectroscopy. The term "spatial medicine" is recently coined by Eric Topol to refer to a study that used deep visual proteomics to find a therapeutic treatment for patients with a rare skin condition.


== Spatial genomics ==
Spatial genomics localizes the native three dimensional genome architecture within the nucleus. Nuclear organization of chromosomes and how chromosomes are positioned and folded has implications for gene regulation, transcription, DNA replication, DNA damage repair, and cell division. 


== Spatial omics vs Spatial Biology ==
Spatial omics refers to the collection of high-throughput molecular profiling techniques that measure and spatially map the distribution of transcriptome, proteome or other biomolecules in a tissue. Spatial biology is a more general term that encompasses the science and techniques, but often spatial biology and spatial omics are used interchangeably.


== See also ==
Visible Embryo Project (VEP)
Spatial transcriptomics


== References ==.
Aerobiology (from Greek ἀήρ, aēr, "air"; βίος, bios, "life"; and -λογία, -logia) is a branch of biology that studies the passive transport of organic particles, such as bacteria, fungal spores, very small insects, pollen grains and viruses. 
Aerobiologists have traditionally been involved in the measurement and reporting of airborne pollen and fungal spores as a service to those with allergies. However, aerobiology is a varied field, relating to environmental science, plant science, meteorology, phenology, and climate change.


== Overview ==
The first mention of "aerobiology" was made by Fred Campbell Meier in the 1930s. The particles, which can be described as Aeroplankton, generally range in size from nanometers to micrometers which makes them challenging to detect.
Aerosolization is the process of a small and light particles becoming suspended in moving air. Now bioaerosols, these pollen and fungal spores can be transported across an ocean, or even travel around the globe. Due to the high quantities of microbes and the ease of dispersion, Martinus Beijerinck once said "Everything is everywhere, the environment selects". This means that aeroplankton are everywhere and have been everywhere, and it solely depends on environmental factors to determine which remain. Aeroplankton are found in significant quantities even in the Atmospheric boundary layer (ABL). The effects on climate and cloud chemistry of these atmospheric populations is still under review.
NASA and other research agencies are studying how long these bioaerosols can remain afloat and how they can survive in such extreme climates. The conditions of the upper atmosphere are similar to the climate on Mars' surface, and the microbes found are helping redefine the conditions which can support life.


== Dispersal of particles ==
The process of dispersal of aerobiological particles has 3 steps: removal from source, dispersion through air, and deposition to rest. The particle geometry and environment affect all three phases, however once it is aerosolized, its fate depends on the laws of physics governing the motion of the air.


=== Removal from Source ===

Pollen and spores can be blown from their surface or shaken loose. Generally the wind speed required for release is higher than average wind speed. Rain splatter can also dislodge spores. Some fungi can even be triggered by environmental factors to actively eject spores.


=== Dispersion through Air ===
Once released from rest, the aeroplankton is at the mercy of the wind and physics. The settling speed of spores and pollen vary and is a major factor in dispersion; the longer the particle is floating, the longer it can be caught by a turbulent wind gust. Wind speed and direction fluctuate with time and height, so the specific path of once neighboring particles can vary significantly. The concentration of particles in the air decreases with distance from source, and the dispersion distance is most accurately modeled as a power function.


=== Deposition to Rest ===
Deposition is a combination of gravity and inertia. The fall speed for small particles can be calculated by mass and geometry, but the complex shapes of pollen and spores often fall slower than their estimated speed modeled with simple shapes. Spores can also be removed from the air from impact; the inertia of the particles will cause them to hit surfaces along their path, instead of flowing around them like air.


== Experimental methods ==
There have been many studies performed to understand real-life dispersal patterns of pollen and spores. To collect samples, studies often use a volumetric spore trap such as a Hirst-type sampler. Particles stick to a sampling strip and then can be inspected under a microscope. Scientists have to count the particles under magnification, and then analyze sample DNA by Amplicon sequence variant (ASV) or another common method.
A challenge repeatedly cited in literature is that because of differing testing or analysis methodologies, results are not always comparable across studies. Therefore, extensive data collection must be performed in each study to get an accurate model. Unfortunately there is no database of aerobiological particle distribution to compare results to.


== Effects on human health ==

Allergic rhinitis is a type of inflammation in the nose that occurs when the immune system overreacts to allergens in the air. It is typically triggered in humans by pollen and other bioaerosols. Between 10% and 30% of people in Western countries are affected. Symptoms are usually worse during pollination periods, when there is significantly more pollen aerosolized in the air. In these peak periods, staying indoors is one way to limit exposure. However, studies have shown that there are still significant levels of pollen indoors. In the winter, pollen levels indoors actually exceed outdoor levels.
Up to date data on pollen levels is critical for humans that have allergies. A current limitation is that many spore traps require scientists to identify and count individual pollen grains under magnification. This causes data to be delayed, sometimes by over a week. There are currently a number of fully automatic spore traps in development, and once they are fully functional they will improve the lives of people with allergies.


== Effects of climate change ==

Scientists have predicted that the meteorological results of climate change will weaken pollen and spore dispersal barriers, and lead to less biological uniqueness in different regions. Precipitation increases richness (number of species) of biodiversity in regions because clouds formulate in the upper atmosphere where there is more varied biodiversity. Specifically in the Arctic, climate change has dramatically increased precipitation, and scientists have seen new microbes in the area because of it.
Rising summer temperatures and CO2 levels have shown to increase total amounts of pollen released by certain trees, as well as delay the start of pollen season. However, more studies are needed to see long term effects of climate change.


== See also ==
Airborne transmission – Disease transmission by airborne particles
Miasma theory – Obsolete medical theory about the transmission of disease through bad air
Wells-Riley model – Model of airborne disease transmission


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Zimmer, Carl (2025). Air-Borne: The Hidden History of the Life We Breathe. Penguin Group. ISBN 978-0-593-47359-7..
Idiobiology is a branch of biology which studies individual organisms, or the study of organisms as individuals.


== References ==.
Sociobiology is a field of biology that aims to explain social behavior in terms of evolution. It draws from disciplines including psychology, ethology, anthropology, evolution, zoology, archaeology, and population genetics. Within the study of human societies, sociobiology is closely related to evolutionary anthropology, human behavioral ecology, evolutionary psychology, and sociology.
Sociobiology investigates social behaviors such as mating patterns, territorial fights, pack hunting, and the hive society of social insects. It argues that just as selection pressure led to animals evolving useful ways of interacting with the natural environment, so also it led to the genetic evolution of advantageous social behavior.
While the term "sociobiology" originated at least as early as the 1940s; the concept did not gain major recognition until the publication of E. O. Wilson's book Sociobiology: The New Synthesis in 1975. The field quickly became the subject of scientific controversy. Critics, led by Richard Lewontin and Stephen Jay Gould, argued that genes played a role in human behavior, but that traits such as aggressiveness could be explained by social environment rather than by biology. Sociobiologists responded by pointing to the complex relationship between nature and nurture. Among sociobiologists, the controversy between laying weight to different levels of selection was settled between D.S. Wilson and E.O. Wilson in 2007.


== Definition ==
E. O. Wilson defined sociobiology as "the extension of population biology and evolutionary theory to social organization".
Sociobiology is based on the premise that some behaviors (social and individual) are at least partly inherited and can be affected by natural selection. 
The discipline seeks to explain behavior as a product of natural selection. Behavior is therefore seen as an effort to preserve one's genes in the population. Inherent in sociobiological reasoning is the idea that certain genes or gene combinations that influence particular behavioral traits can be inherited from generation to generation.
For example, newly dominant male lions often kill cubs in the pride that they did not sire. This behavior is adaptive because killing the cubs eliminates competition for their own offspring and causes the nursing females to come into heat faster, thus allowing more of his genes to enter into the population. Sociobiologists would view this instinctual cub-killing behavior as being inherited through the genes of successfully reproducing male lions, whereas non-killing behavior may have died out as those lions were less successful in reproducing.


== History ==

The philosopher of biology Daniel Dennett suggested that the political philosopher Thomas Hobbes was the first proto-sociobiologist, arguing that in his 1651 book Leviathan Hobbes had explained the origins of morals in human society from an amoral sociobiological perspective.
The geneticist of animal behavior John Paul Scott coined the word sociobiology at a 1948 conference on genetics and social behavior, which called for a conjoint development of field and laboratory studies in animal behavior research. With John Paul Scott's organizational efforts, a "Section of Animal Behavior and Sociobiology" of the Ecological Society of America was created in 1956, which became a Division of Animal Behavior of the American Society of Zoology in 1958. In 1956, E. O. Wilson came in contact with this emerging sociobiology through his PhD student Stuart A. Altmann, who had been in close relation with the participants to the 1948 conference. Altmann developed his own brand of sociobiology to study the social behavior of rhesus macaques, using statistics, and was hired as a "sociobiologist" at the Yerkes Regional Primate Research Center in 1965.
Wilson's sociobiology is different from John Paul Scott's or Altmann's, insofar as he drew on mathematical models of social behavior centered on the maximization of the genetic fitness by W. D. Hamilton, Robert Trivers, John Maynard Smith, and George R. Price. The three sociobiologies by Scott, Altmann and Wilson have in common to place naturalist studies at the core of the research on animal social behavior and by drawing alliances with emerging research methodologies, at a time when "biology in the field" was threatened to be made old-fashioned by "modern" practices of science (laboratory studies, mathematical biology, molecular biology).
Once a specialist term, "sociobiology" became widely known in 1975 when Wilson published his book Sociobiology: The New Synthesis, sparking intense controversy. Since then "sociobiology" has largely been equated with Wilson's vision. The book pioneered and popularized the attempt to explain the evolutionary mechanics behind social behaviors such as altruism, aggression, and nurturance, primarily in ants (Wilson's own research specialty) and other Hymenoptera, but also in other animals. However, the influence of evolution on behavior has been of interest to biologists and philosophers from the 19th century onwards. Peter Kropotkin's Mutual Aid: A Factor of Evolution, written in the early 1890s, is a popular example. The final chapter of the book is devoted to sociobiological explanations of human behavior, and Wilson later wrote a Pulitzer Prize winning book, On Human Nature, that addressed human behavior specifically.
Edward H. Hagen writes in The Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology that sociobiology is, despite the public controversy on its application to humans, "one of the scientific triumphs of the twentieth century." He adds that "Sociobiology is now part of the core research and curriculum of virtually all biology departments, and it is a foundation of the work of almost all field biologists." Sociobiological research on nonhuman organisms has increased dramatically and continuously in the world's top scientific journals such as Nature and Science. The more general term behavioral ecology is commonly substituted to avoid the public controversy.


== Theory ==


=== Natural selection ===

Sociobiologists maintain that human and other animal behavior can be partly explained as the outcome of natural selection. They contend that in order to fully understand behavior, it must be analyzed in terms of evolution, principally by natural selection. Sociobiology is based upon two fundamental premises:

Certain behavioral traits are inherited,
Inherited behavioral traits have been honed by natural selection and were adaptive in the environment in which they evolved.
Sociobiology uses Nikolaas Tinbergen's four questions to search for explanations of animal behavior. Two of these categories are at the species level; two, at the individual level. The species-level categories (often called "ultimate explanations") are

the adaptive function that a behavior serves and
the historical evolutionary process that resulted in this functionality.
The individual-level categories (often called "proximate explanations") are

the development of the individual and
the proximate mechanism (such as brain anatomy and hormones).


=== In humans ===
Studies of human behavior genetics have found behavioral traits such as creativity, extroversion, aggressiveness, and IQ have high heritability. Researchers are careful to point out that heritability does not constrain the influence that environmental or cultural factors may have on these traits.
Various theorists have argued that in some environments criminal behavior might be adaptive. The evolutionary neuroandrogenic (ENA) theory, by sociologist/criminologist Lee Ellis, posits that female sexual selection has led to increased competitive behavior among men, sometimes resulting in criminality. In another theory, Mark van Vugt argues that a history of intergroup conflict for resources between men have led to differences in violence and aggression between men and women. The novelist Elias Canetti also has noted applications of sociobiological theory to cultural practices such as slavery and autocracy.


== Genetics ==
Genetic mouse mutants illustrate the power that genes exert on behavior. For example, the transcription factor FEV (aka Pet1), through its role in maintaining the serotonergic system in the brain, is required for normal aggressive and anxiety-like behavior. Thus, when FEV is genetically deleted from the mouse genome, male mice will instantly attack other males, whereas their wild-type counterparts take significantly longer to initiate violent behavior. In addition, FEV has been shown to be required for correct maternal behavior in mice, such that offspring of mothers without the FEV factor do not survive unless cross-fostered to other wild-type female mice.
A genetic basis for instinctive behavioral traits among non-human species, such as in the above example, is commonly accepted among many biologists; however, attempting to use a genetic basis to explain complex behaviors in human societies has remained extremely controversial.


== Reception ==
Steven Pinker argues that critics have been overly swayed by politics and a fear of biological determinism, accusing among others Stephen Jay Gould and Richard Lewontin of being "radical scientists", whose stance on human nature is influenced by politics rather than science, while Lewontin, Steven Rose and Leon Kamin, who drew a distinction between the politics and history of an idea and its scientific validity, argue that sociobiology fails on scientific grounds. Gould grouped sociobiology with eugenics, criticizing both in his book The Mismeasure of Man. When Napoleon Chagnon scheduled sessions on sociobiology at the 1976 American Anthropological Association convention, other scholars attempted to cancel them with what Chagnon later described as "Impassioned accusations of racism, fascism and Nazism"; Margaret Mead's support caused the sessions to occur as scheduled.
Noam Chomsky has expressed views on sociobiology on several occasions. During a 1976 meeting of the Sociobiology Study Group, as reported by Ullica Segerstråle, Chomsky argued for the importance of a sociobiologically informed notion of human nature. Chomsky argued that human beings are biological organisms and ought to be studied as such, with his criticism of the "blank slate" doctrine in the social sciences (which would inspire a great deal of Steven Pinker's and others' work in evolutionary psychology), in his 1975 Reflections on Language. Chomsky further hinted at the possible reconciliation of his anarchist political views and sociobiology in a discussion of Peter Kropotkin's Mutual Aid: A Factor of Evolution, which focused more on altruism than aggression, suggesting that anarchist societies were feasible because of an innate human tendency to cooperate.
Wilson has claimed that he had never meant to imply what ought to be, only what is the case. However, some critics have argued that the language of sociobiology readily slips from "is" to "ought", an instance of the naturalistic fallacy. Pinker has argued that opposition to stances considered anti-social, such as ethnic nepotism, is based on moral assumptions, meaning that such opposition is not falsifiable by scientific advances. The history of this debate, and others related to it, are covered in detail by Cronin (1993), Segerstråle (2000), and Alcock (2001).


== See also ==


== Notes ==


== References ==


== Sources ==
Alcock, John (2001). The triumph of sociobiology. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-514383-6.
Barkow, Jerome, ed. (2006). Missing the Revolution: Darwinism for Social Scientists. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-513002-7.
Cronin, Helena (1993). The ant and the peacock: Altruism and sexual selection from Darwin to today. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-45765-1.
Segerstråle, Ullica (2000). Defenders of the truth: The sociobiology debate. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-286215-0.


== Further reading ==
Etcoff, Nancy (1999). Survival of the Prettiest: The Science of Beauty. Anchor Books. ISBN 978-0-385-47942-4.
Kaplan, Gisela; Rogers, Lesley J. (2003). Gene Worship: Moving Beyond the Nature/Nurture Debate over Genes, Brain, and Gender. Other Press. ISBN 978-1-59051-034-6.
Lerner, Richard M. (1992). Final Solutions: Biology, Prejudice, and Genocide. Pennsylvania State University Press. ISBN 978-0-271-00793-9.
Ovcharov, Dmitry (2023). "The problem of biological and social in Russian philosophy of the second half of the XX — beginning of the XXI century: historical and philosophical analytical review". Bulletin of the Chelyabinsk State University. 477 (7): 61–67. doi:10.47475/1994-2796-2023-477-7-61-67.
Richards, Janet Radcliffe (2000). Human Nature After Darwin: A Philosophical Introduction. London: Routledge.


== External links ==

Sociobiology (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)
The Sociobiology of Sociopathy, Mealey, 1995
Speak, Darwinists! – interviews with leading sociobiologists
Race and creation by Richard Dawkins
Scientist at Work |Edward O. Wilson |Taking a Cue From Ants on Evolution of Humans by Nicholas Wade.
The Fauna (pl.: faunae or faunas) is the whole of animal life present in a particular region or time. The corresponding terms for plants and fungi are flora and funga, respectively. Flora, fauna, funga and other forms of life are collectively referred to as biota. Zoologists and paleontologists use fauna to refer to a typical collection of animals found in a specific time or place, e.g. the "Sonoran Desert fauna" or the "Burgess Shale fauna". Paleontologists sometimes refer to a sequence of faunal stages, which is a series of rocks all containing similar fossils. The study of animals of a particular region is called faunistics.


== Etymology ==
Fauna comes from the name Fauna, a Roman goddess of earth and fertility, the Roman god Faunus, and the related forest spirits called fauns. All three words are cognates of the name of the Greek god Pan, and panis is the Modern Greek equivalent of fauna (πανίς or rather πανίδα). Fauna is also the word for a book that catalogues the animals in such a manner. The term was first used by Carl Linnaeus from Sweden in the title of his 1745 work Fauna Suecica.


== Subdivisions on the basis of region ==


=== Cryofauna ===
Cryofauna refers to the animals that live in, or very close to, cold areas.


=== Cryptofauna ===
Cryptofauna is the fauna that exists in protected or concealed microhabitats.


=== Epifauna ===
Epifauna, also called epibenthos, are aquatic animals that live on the bottom substratum as opposed to within it, that is, the benthic fauna that live on top of the sediment surface at the seafloor.


=== Infauna ===

Infauna are benthic organisms that live within the bottom substratum of a water body, especially within the bottom-most oceanic sediments, the layer of small particles at the bottom of a body of water, rather than on its surface. Bacteria and microalgae may also live in the interstices of bottom sediments. In general, infaunal animals become progressively smaller and less abundant with increasing water depth and distance from shore, whereas bacteria show more constancy in abundance, tending toward one million cells per milliliter of interstitial seawater.
Such creatures are found in the fossil record and include lingulata, trilobites and worms. They made burrows in the sediment as protection and may also have fed upon detritus or the mat of microbes which tended to grow on the surface of the sediment. Today, a variety of organisms live in and disturb the sediment. The deepest burrowers are the ghost shrimps (Thalassinidea), which go as deep as 3 metres (10 ft) into the sediment at the bottom of the ocean.


=== Limnofauna ===
Limnofauna refers to the animals that live in fresh water.


=== Macrofauna ===
Macrofauna are benthic or soil organisms which are retained on a 0.5 mm sieve.  Studies in the deep sea define macrofauna as animals retained on a 0.3 mm sieve to account for the small size of many of the taxa.


=== Megafauna ===

Megafauna are large animals of any particular region or time. For example, Australian megafauna.


=== Meiofauna ===

Meiofauna are small benthic invertebrates that live in both marine and freshwater environments. The term meiofauna loosely defines a group of organisms by their 
size, larger than microfauna but smaller than macrofauna, rather than a taxonomic grouping. One environment for meiofauna is between grains of damp sand (see Mystacocarida).
In practice these are metazoan animals that can pass unharmed through a 0.5–1 mm mesh but will be retained by a 30–45 μm mesh, but the exact dimensions will vary from researcher to researcher. Whether an organism passes through a 1 mm mesh also depends upon whether it is alive or dead at the time of sorting.


=== Mesofauna ===

Mesofauna are macroscopic soil animals such as arthropods or nematodes. Mesofauna are extremely diverse; considering just the springtails (Collembola), as of 1998, approximately 6,500 species had been identified.


=== Microfauna ===

Microfauna are microscopic or very small animals (usually including protozoans and very small animals such as rotifers). To qualify as part of the microfauna, an organism must exhibit animal-like characteristics, as opposed to microflora, which are more plant-like.


=== Stygofauna ===

Stygofauna is any fauna that lives in groundwater systems or aquifers, such as caves, fissures and vugs. Stygofauna and troglofauna are the two types of subterranean fauna (based on life-history). Both are associated with subterranean environments – stygofauna is associated with water, and troglofauna with caves and spaces above the water table. Stygofauna can live within freshwater aquifers and within the pore spaces of limestone, calcrete or laterite, whilst larger animals can be found in cave waters and wells. Stygofaunal animals, like troglofauna, are divided into three groups based on their life history - stygophiles, stygoxenes, and stygobites.


=== Troglofauna ===

Troglofauna are small cave-dwelling animals that have adapted to their dark surroundings. Troglofauna and stygofauna are the two types of subterranean fauna (based on life-history). Both are associated with subterranean environments – troglofauna is associated with caves and spaces above the water table and stygofauna with water. Troglofaunal species include spiders, insects, myriapods and others. Some troglofauna lives permanently underground and cannot survive outside the cave environment. Troglofauna adaptations and characteristics include a heightened sense of hearing, touch and smell. Loss of under-used senses is apparent in the lack of pigmentation as well as eyesight in most troglofauna. Troglofauna insects may exhibit a lack of wings and longer appendages.


=== Xenofauna ===

Xenofauna, theoretically, are alien organisms that can be described as animal analogues. While no alien life forms, animal-like or otherwise, are known definitively, the concept of alien life remains a subject of great interest in fields like astronomy, astrobiology, biochemistry, evolutionary biology, science fiction, and philosophy.


=== Other ===

Other terms include avifauna, which means "bird fauna" and piscifauna (or ichthyofauna), which means "fish fauna".


== Treatises ==


=== Classic faunas ===
Linnaeus, Carolus. Fauna Suecica. 1746


== See also ==


== References ==


== External links ==

"Biodiversity of Collembola and their functional role in the ecosystem" (by Josef Rusek; September 1998).
Developmental bioelectricity is the regulation of cell, tissue, and organ-level patterning and behavior by electrical signals during the development of embryonic animals and plants. The charge carrier in developmental bioelectricity is the ion (a charged atom) rather than the electron, and an electric current and field is generated whenever a net ion flux occurs. Cells and tissues of all types use flows of ions to communicate electrically. Endogenous electric currents and fields, ion fluxes, and differences in resting potential across tissues comprise a signalling system. It functions along with biochemical factors, transcriptional networks, and other physical forces to regulate cell behaviour and large-scale patterning in processes such as embryogenesis, regeneration, and cancer suppression.


== Overview ==
Developmental bioelectricity is a sub-discipline of biology, related to, but distinct from, neurophysiology and bioelectromagnetics. Developmental bioelectricity refers to the endogenous ion fluxes, transmembrane and transepithelial voltage gradients, and electric currents and fields produced and sustained in living cells and tissues. This electrical activity is often used during embryogenesis, regeneration, and cancer suppression—it is one layer of the complex field of signals that impinge upon all cells in vivo and regulate their interactions during pattern formation and maintenance. This is distinct from neural bioelectricity (classically termed electrophysiology), which refers to the rapid and transient spiking in well-recognized excitable cells like neurons and myocytes (muscle cells); and from bioelectromagnetics, which refers to the effects of applied electromagnetic radiation, and endogenous electromagnetics such as biophoton emission and magnetite.

The inside/outside discontinuity at the cell surface enabled by a lipid bilayer membrane (capacitor) is at the core of bioelectricity. The plasma membrane was an indispensable structure for the origin and evolution of life itself. It provided compartmentalization permitting the setting of a differential voltage/potential gradient (battery or voltage source) across the membrane, probably allowing early and rudimentary bioenergetics that fueled cell mechanisms. During evolution, the initially purely passive diffusion of ions (charge carriers), become gradually controlled by the acquisition of ion channels, pumps, exchangers, and transporters. These energetically free (resistors or conductors, passive transport) or expensive (current sources, active transport) translocators set and fine tune voltage gradients – resting potentials – that are ubiquitous and essential to life's physiology, ranging from bioenergetics, motion, sensing, nutrient transport, toxins clearance, and signaling in homeostatic and disease/injury conditions. Upon stimuli or barrier breaking (short-circuit) of the membrane, ions powered by the voltage gradient (electromotive force) diffuse or leak, respectively, through the cytoplasm and interstitial fluids (conductors), generating measurable electric currents – net ion fluxes – and fields. Some ions (such as calcium) and molecules (such as hydrogen peroxide) modulate targeted translocators to produce a current or to enhance, mitigate or even reverse an initial current, being switchers.
Endogenous bioelectric signals are produced in cells by the cumulative action of ion channels, pumps, and transporters. In non-excitable cells, the resting potential across the plasma membrane (Vmem) of individual cells propagate across distances via electrical synapses known as gap junctions (conductors), which allow cells to share their resting potential with neighbors. Aligned and stacked cells (such as in epithelia) generate transepithelial potentials (such as batteries in series) and electric fields, which likewise propagate across tissues. Tight junctions (resistors) efficiently mitigate the paracellular ion diffusion and leakage, precluding the voltage short circuit. Together, these voltages and electric fields form rich and dynamic and patterns inside living bodies that demarcate anatomical features, thus acting like blueprints for gene expression and morphogenesis in some instances. More than correlations, these bioelectrical distributions are dynamic, evolving with time and with the microenvironment and even long-distant conditions to serve as instructive influences over cell behavior and large-scale patterning during embryogenesis, regeneration, and cancer suppression. Bioelectric control mechanisms are an important emerging target for advances in regenerative medicine, birth defects, cancer, and synthetic bioengineering.


== History ==


=== 18th century ===
Developmental bioelectricity began in the 18th century. Several seminal works stimulating muscle contractions using Leyden jars culminated with the publication of classical studies by Luigi Galvani in 1791 (De viribus electricitatis in motu musculari) and 1794. In these, Galvani thought to have uncovered intrinsic electric-producing ability in living tissues or "animal electricity". Alessandro Volta showed that the frog's leg muscle twitching was due to a static electricity generator and from dissimilar metals undergoing or catalyzing electrochemical reactions. Galvani showed, in a 1794 study, twitching without metal electricity by touching the leg muscle with a deviating cut sciatic nerve, definitively demonstrating "animal electricity". Unknowingly, Galvani with this and related experiments discovered the injury current (ion leakage driven by the intact membrane/epithelial potential) and injury potential (potential difference between injured and intact membrane/epithelium). The injury potential was, in fact, the electrical source behind the leg contraction, as realized in the next century. Subsequent work ultimately extended this field broadly beyond nerve and muscle to all cells, from bacteria to non-excitable mammalian cells.


=== 19th century ===
Building on earlier studies, further glimpses of developmental bioelectricity occurred with the discovery of wound-related electric currents and fields in the 1840s, when the electrophysiologist Emil du Bois-Reymond reported macroscopic level electrical activities in frog, fish and human bodies. He recorded minute electric currents in live tissues and organisms with a then state-of-the-art galvanometer made of insulated copper wire coils. He unveiled the fast-changing electricity associated with muscle contraction and nerve excitation – the action potentials. Du Bois-Reymond also reported in detail less fluctuating electricity at wounds – injury current and potential – he made to himself.


=== Early 20th century ===
Developmental bioelectricity work began in earnest at the beginning of the 20th century. Ida H. Hyde studied the role of electricity in the development of eggs.
T. H. Morgan and others studied the electrophysiology of the earthworm.
Oren E. Frazee studied the effects of electricity on limb regeneration in amphibians.
E. J. Lund explored morphogenesis in flowering plants.
Libbie Hyman studied vertebrate and invertebrate animals. 
In the 1920s and 1930s, Elmer J. Lund and Harold Saxton Burr wrote multiple papers about the role of electricity in embryonic development. Lund measured currents in a large number of living model systems, correlating them to changes in patterning. In contrast, Burr used a voltmeter to measure voltage gradients, examining developing embryonic tissues and tumors, in a range of animals and plants. Applied electric fields were demonstrated to alter the regeneration of planarian by Marsh and Beams in the 1940s and 1950s, inducing the formation of heads or tails at cut sites, reversing the primary body polarity.


=== Late 20th century ===
In the 1970s, Lionel Jaffe and Richard Nuccittelli's introduction and development of the vibrating probe, the first device for quantitative non-invasive characterization of the extracellular minute ion currents, revitalized the field.
Researchers such as Joseph Vanable, Richard Borgens, Ken Robinson, and Colin McCaig explored the roles of endogenous bioelectric signaling in limb development and regeneration, embryogenesis, organ polarity, and wound healing.

 
C.D. Cone studied the role of resting potential in regulating cell differentiation and proliferation. 
Subsequent work has identified specific regions of the resting potential spectrum that correspond to distinct cell states such as quiescent, stem, cancer, and terminally differentiated.
Although this body of work generated a significant amount of high-quality physiological data, this large-scale biophysics approach has historically come second to the study of biochemical gradients and genetic networks in biology education, funding, and overall popularity among biologists. A key factor that contributed to this field lagging behind molecular genetics and biochemistry is that bioelectricity is inherently a living phenomenon – it cannot be studied in fixed specimens. Working with bioelectricity is more complex than traditional approaches to developmental biology, both methodologically and conceptually, as it typically requires a highly interdisciplinary approach.


=== Biological battery ===
A “biological battery” was demonstrated in late 2025 at Belmonte Arboretum, part of Wageningen University & Research as part of its program provides educational scientific experiences to young people. In this case a path was marked by small Light-emitting diodes (LEDs) that provide a diffuse night-time glow sufficient to mark the path without disturbing nature.
The electricity used to power the LEDs is essentially sunlight that fell on green photosynthesising living plant material. That process takes water from the ground (H2O) and carbon dioxide (CO2) in the air to rearrange the hydrogen and oxygen into carbohydrate molecules, releasing unwanted oxygen to the air. Carbohydrates are the basic building blocks of plants. 
Only some of the solar energy collected by the green material is used for photosynthesis, some is discharged through the roots int the soil, where bacteria use it to synthesize other essential molecules and elements such as nitrogen that support plant life. 
To extract electricity from sunlight conductive carbon electrodes were introduced near the roots of bushes to capture the “free” electrons produced by bacteria. These serve as the negative cell terminals,  other carbon electrodes placed in the air provided the corresponding positive connections. Although the energy captured from a single bush is very small many can be connected in series (a “battery” of "cells") to provide enough to drive the LEDs without conventional electrochemical cells or regular solar cells.


== Study techniques ==


=== Electrodes ===
The gold standard techniques to quantitatively extract electric dimensions from living specimens, ranging from cell to organism levels, are the glass microelectrode (or micropipette), the vibrating (or self-referencing) voltage probe, and the vibrating ion-selective microelectrode. The former is inherently invasive, and the two latter are non-invasive, but all are ultra-sensitive and fast-responsive sensors extensively used in a plethora of physiological conditions in widespread biological models.
The glass microelectrode was developed in the 1940s to study the action potential of excitable cells, deriving from the seminal work by Hodgkin and Huxley in the giant axon squid. It is simply a liquid salt bridge connecting the biological specimen with the electrode, protecting tissues from leachable toxins and redox reactions of the bare electrode. Owing to its low impedance, low junction potential and weak polarization, silver electrodes are standard transducers of the ionic into electric current that occurs through a reversible redox reaction at the electrode surface.
The vibrating probe was introduced in biological studies in the 1970s. The voltage-sensitive probe is electroplated with platinum to form a capacitive black tip ball with large surface area. When vibrating in an artificial or natural DC voltage gradient, the capacitive ball oscillates in a sinusoidal AC output. The amplitude of the wave is proportional to the measuring potential difference at the frequency of the vibration, efficiently filtered by a lock-in amplifier that boosts probe's sensitivity.
The vibrating ion-selective microelectrode was first used in 1990 to measure calcium fluxes in various cells and tissues. The ion-selective microelectrode is an adaptation of the glass microelectrode, where an ion-specific liquid ion exchanger (ionophore) is tip-filled into a previously silanized (to prevent leakage) microelectrode. Also, the microelectrode vibrates at low frequencies to operate in the accurate self-referencing mode. Only the specific ion permeates the ionophore, therefore the voltage readout is proportional to the ion concentration in the measuring condition. Then, flux is calculated using the Fick's first law.
Emerging optic-based techniques, for example, the pH optrode (or optode), which can be integrated into a self-referencing system may become an alternative or additional technique in bioelectricity laboratories. The optrode does not require referencing and is insensitive to electromagnetism simplifying system setting up and making it a suitable option for recordings where electric stimulation is simultaneously applied.
Much work to functionally study bioelectric signaling has made use of applied (exogenous) electric currents and fields via DC and AC voltage-delivering apparatus integrated with agarose salt bridges. These devices can generate countless combinations of voltage magnitude and direction, pulses, and frequencies. Currently, lab-on-a-chip mediated application of electric fields is gaining ground in the field with the possibility to allow high-throughput screening assays of the large combinatory outputs.


=== Fluorescence ===
Progress in molecular biology over the last six decades has produced powerful tools that facilitate the dissection of biochemical and genetic signals; yet, they tend to not be well-suited for bioelectric studies in vivo. Prior work relied extensively on current applied directly by electrodes, reinvigorated by significant recent advances in materials science and extracellular current measurements, facilitated by sophisticated self-referencing electrode systems. While electrode applications for manipulating neuraly-controlled body processes have recently attracted much attention, there are other opportunities for controlling somatic processes, as most cell types are electrically active and respond to ionic signals from themselves and their neighbors.
In the early part of the 21st century, a number of new molecular techniques were developed that allowed bioelectric pathways to be investigated with a high degree of mechanistic resolution, and to be linked to canonical molecular cascades. These include:

Pharmacological screens to identify endogenous channels and pumps responsible for specific patterning events;
Voltage-sensitive fluorescent reporter dyes and genetically encoded fluorescent voltage indicators for the characterization of the bioelectric state in vivo.
Panels of well-characterized dominant ion channels that can be misexpressed in cells of interest to alter the bioelectric state in desired ways; and
Computational platforms that are coming on-line to assist in building predictive models of bioelectric dynamics in tissues.
Compared with the electrode-based techniques, the molecular probes provide a wider spatial resolution and facilitated dynamic analysis over time. Although calibration or titration can be possible, molecular probes are typically semi-quantitative, whereas electrodes provide absolute bioelectric values. Another advantage of fluorescence and other probes is their less-invasive nature and spatial multiplexing, enabling the simultaneous monitoring of large areas of embryonic or other tissues in vivo during normal or pathological pattering processes.


== Roles in organisms ==


=== Early development ===
Work in model systems such as Xenopus laevis and zebrafish has revealed a role for bioelectric signaling in the development of heart, face, eye, brain, and other organs. Screens have identified roles for ion channels in size control of structures such as the zebrafish fin, while focused gain-of-function studies have shown for example that body parts can be re-specified at the organ level – for example creating entire eyes in gut endoderm. As in the brain, developmental bioelectrics can integrate information across significant distance in the embryo, for example such as the control of brain size by bioelectric states of ventral tissue. and the control of tumorigenesis at the site of oncogene expression by bioelectric state of remote cells.
Human disorders, as well as numerous mouse mutants show that bioelectric signaling is important for human development (tables 1 and 2). Those effects are pervasively linked to channelopathies, which are human disorders that result from mutations that disrupt ion channels.
Several channelopathies result in morphological abnormalities or congenital birth defects in addition to symptoms that affect muscle and or neurons. For example, mutations that disrupt an inwardly rectifying potassium channel Kir2.1 cause dominantly inherited Andersen–Tawil syndrome (ATS). ATS patients experience periodic paralysis, cardiac arrhythmias, and multiple morphological abnormalities that can include cleft or high arched palate, cleft or thin upper lip, flattened philtrum, micrognathia, dental oligodontia, enamel hypoplasia, delayed dentition eruption, malocclusion, broad forehead, wide set eyes, low set ears, syndactyly, clinodactyly, brachydactyly, and dysplastic kidneys. Mutations that disrupt another inwardly rectifying K+ channel Girk2 encoded by KCNJ6 cause Keppen-Lubinsky syndrome which includes microcephaly, a narrow nasal bridge, a high arched palate, and severe generalized lipodystrophy (failure to generate adipose tissue). KCNJ6 is in the Down syndrome critical region such that duplications that include this region lead to craniofacial and limb abnormalities and duplications that do not include this region do not lead to morphological symptoms of Down syndrome. Mutations in KCNH1, a voltage gated potassium channel lead to Temple-Baraitser (also known as Zimmermann- Laband) syndrome. Common features of Temple-Baraitser syndrome include absent or hypoplastic of finger and toe nails and phalanges and joint instability. Craniofacial defects associated with mutations in KCNH1 include cleft or high arched palate, hypertelorism, dysmorphic ears, dysmorphic nose, gingival hypertrophy, and abnormal number of teeth.
Mutations in CaV1.2, a voltage gated Ca2+ channel, lead to Timothy syndrome, which causes severe cardiac arrhythmia (long-QT) along with syndactyly and similar craniofacial defects to Andersen-Tawil syndrome including cleft or high-arched palate, micrognathia, low set ears, syndactyly and brachydactyly. While these channelopathies are rare, they show that functional ion channels are important for development. Furthermore, in utero exposure to anti-epileptic medications that target some ion channels also cause increased incidence of birth defects such as oral cleft. The effects of both genetic and exogenous disruption of ion channels lend insight into the importance of bioelectric signaling in development.


=== Wound healing and cell guidance ===
One of the best-understood roles for bioelectric gradients is at the tissue-level endogenous electric fields utilized during wound healing. It is challenging to study wound-associated electric fields, because these fields are weak, less fluctuating, and do not have immediate biological responses when compared to nerve pulses and muscle contraction. The development of the vibrating and glass microelectrodes, demonstrated that wounds indeed produced and, importantly, sustained measurable electric currents and electric fields. These techniques allow further characterization of the wound electric fields/currents at cornea and skin wounds, which show active spatial and temporal features, suggesting active regulation of these electrical phenomena. For example, the wound electric currents are always the strongest at the wound edge, which gradually increased to reach a peak about 1 hour after injury. At wounds in diabetic animals, the wound electric fields are significantly compromised. Understanding the mechanisms of generation and regulation of the wound electric currents/fields is expected to reveal new approaches to manipulate the electrical aspect for better wound healing.
How are the electric fields at a wound produced? Epithelia actively pump and differentially segregate ions. In the cornea epithelium, for example, Na+ and K+ are transported inwards from tear fluid to extracellular fluid, and Cl− is transported out of the extracellular fluid into the tear fluid. The epithelial cells are connected by tight junctions, forming the major electrical resistive barrier, and thus establishing an electrical gradient across the epithelium – the transepithelial potential (TEP). Breaking the epithelial barrier, as occurs in any wounds, creates a hole that breaches the high electrical resistance established by the tight junctions in the epithelial sheet, short-circuiting the epithelium locally. The TEP therefore drops to zero at the wound. However, normal ion transport continues in unwounded epithelial cells beyond the wound edge (typically <1 mm away), driving positive charge flow out of the wound and establishing a steady, laterally-oriented electric field (EF) with the cathode at the wound. Skin also generates a TEP, and when a skin wound is made, similar wound electric currents and fields arise, until the epithelial barrier function recovers to terminate the short-circuit at the wound. When wound electric fields are manipulated with pharmacological agents that either stimulate or inhibit transport of ions, the wound electric fields also increase or decrease, respectively. Wound healing can be speed up or slowed down accordingly in cornea wounds.
How do electric fields affect wound healing? To heal wounds, cells surrounding the wound must migrate and grow directionally into the wound to cover the defect and restore the barrier. Cells important to heal wounds respond remarkably well to applied electric fields of the same strength that are measured at wounds. The whole gamut of cell types and their responses following injury are affected by physiological electric fields. Those include migration and division of epithelial cells, sprouting and extension of nerves, and migration of leukocytes and endothelial cells. The most well studied cellular behavior is directional migration of epithelial cells in electric fields – electrotaxis. The epithelial cells migrate directionally to the negative pole (cathode), which at a wound is the field polarity of the endogenous vectorial electric fields in the epithelium, pointing (positive to negative) to the wound center. Epithelial cells of the cornea, keratinocytes from the skin, and many other types of cells show directional migration at electric field strengths as low as a few mV mm−1. Large sheets of monolayer epithelial cells, and sheets of stratified multilayered epithelial cells also migrate directionally. Such collective movement closely resembles what happens during wound healing in vivo, where cell sheets move collectively into the wound bed to cover the wound and restore the barrier function of the skin or cornea.
How cells sense such minute extracellular electric fields remains largely elusive. Recent research has started to identify some genetic, signaling and structural elements underlying how cells sense and respond to small physiological electric fields. These include ion channels, intracellular signaling pathways, membrane lipid rafts, and electrophoresis of cellular membrane components.


=== Limb regeneration in animals ===
In the early 20th century, Albert Mathews seminally correlated regeneration of a cnidarian polyp with the potential difference between polyp and stolon surfaces, and affected regeneration by imposing countercurrents. Amedeo Herlitzka, following on the wound electric currents footsteps of his mentor, du Bois-Raymond, theorized about electric currents playing an early role in regeneration, maybe initiating cell proliferation. Using electric fields overriding endogenous ones, Marsh and Beams astoundingly generated double-headed planarians and even reversed the primary body polarity entirely, with tails growing where a head previously existed. After these seed studies, variations of the idea that bioelectricity could sense injury and trigger or at least be a major player in regeneration have spurred over the decades until the present day. A potential explanation lies on resting potentials (primarily Vmem and TEP), which can be, at least in part, dormant sensors (alarms) ready to detect and effectors (triggers) ready to react to local damage.
Following up on the relative success of electric stimulation on non-permissive frog leg regeneration using an implanted bimetallic rod in the late 1960s, the bioelectric extracellular aspect of amphibian limb regeneration was extensively dissected in the next decades. Definitive descriptive and functional physiological data was made possible owing to the development of the ultra-sensitive vibrating probe and improved application devices. Amputation invariably leads to a skin-driven outward current and a consequent lateral electric field setting the cathode at the wound site. Although initially pure ion leakage, an active component eventually takes place and blocking ion translocators typically impairs regeneration. Using biomimetic exogenous electric currents and fields, partial regeneration was achieved, which typically included tissue growth and increased neuronal tissue. Conversely, precluding or reverting endogenous electric current and fields impairs regeneration. These studies in amphibian limb regeneration and related studies in lampreys and mammals  combined with those of bone fracture healing and in vitro studies, led to the general rule that migrating (such as keratinocytes, leucocytes and endothelial cells) and outgrowing (such as axons) cells contributing to regeneration undergo electrotaxis towards the cathode (injury original site). Congruently, an anode is associated with tissue resorption or degeneration, as occurs in impaired regeneration and osteoclastic resorption in bone. Despite these efforts, the promise for a significant epimorphic regeneration in mammals remains a major frontier for future efforts, which includes the use of wearable bioreactors to provide an environment within which pro-regenerative bioelectric states can be driven and continued efforts at electrical stimulation.
Recent molecular work has identified proton and sodium flux as being important for tail regeneration in Xenopus tadpoles, and shown that regeneration of the entire tail (with spinal cord, muscle, etc.) could be triggered in a range of normally non-regenerative conditions by either molecular-genetic, pharmacological, or optogenetic methods. In planaria, work on bioelectric mechanism has revealed control of stem cell behavior, size control during remodeling, anterior-posterior polarity, and head shape. Gap junction-mediated alteration of physiological signaling produces two-headed worms in Dugesia japonica; remarkably, these animals continue to regenerate as two-headed in future rounds of regeneration months after the gap junction-blocking reagent has left the tissue. This stable, long-term alteration of the anatomical layout to which animals regenerate, without genomic editing, is an example of epigenetic inheritance of body pattern, and is also the only available "strain" of planarian species exhibiting an inherited anatomical change that is different from the wild-type.


=== Cancer ===
Defection of cells from the normally tight coordination of activity towards an anatomical structure results in cancer; it is thus no surprise that bioelectricity – a key mechanism for coordinating cell growth and patterning – is a target often implicated in cancer and metastasis. Indeed, it has long been known that gap junctions have a key role in carcinogenesis and progression. Channels can behave as oncogenes and are thus suitable as novel drug targets. Recent work in amphibian models has shown that depolarization of resting potential can trigger metastatic behavior in normal cells, while hyperpolarization (induced by ion channel misexpression, drugs, or light) can suppress tumorigenesis induced by expression of human oncogenes. Depolarization of resting potential appears to be a bioelectric signature by which incipient tumor sites can be detected non-invasively. Refinement of the bioelectric signature of cancer in biomedical contexts, as a diagnostic modality, is one of the possible applications of this field. Excitingly, the ambivalence of polarity – depolarization as marker and hyperpolarization as treatment – make it conceptually possible to derive theragnostic (portmanteau of therapeutics with diagnostics) approaches, designed to simultaneously detect and treat early tumors, in this case based on the normalization of the membrane polarization.


=== Pattern regulation ===
Recent experiments using ion channel opener/blocker drugs, as well as dominant ion channel misexpression, in a range of model species, has shown that bioelectricity, specifically, voltage gradients instruct not only stem cell behavior but also large-scale patterning. Patterning cues are often mediated by spatial gradients of cell resting potentials, or Vmem, which can be transduced into second messenger cascades and transcriptional changes by a handful of known mechanisms. These potentials are set by the function of ion channels and pumps, and shaped by gap junctional connections which establish developmental compartments (isopotential cell fields). Because both gap junctions and ion channels are themselves voltage-sensitive, cell groups implement electric circuits with rich feedback capabilities. The outputs of developmental bioelectric dynamics in vivo represent large-scale patterning decisions such as the number of heads in planarian, the shape of the face in frog development, and the size of tails in zebrafish. Experimental modulation of endogenous bioelectric prepatterns have enabled converting body regions (such as the gut) to a complete eye, inducing regeneration of appendages such as tadpole tails at non-regenerative contexts, and conversion of flatworm head shapes and contents to patterns appropriate to other species of flatworms, despite a normal genome. Recent work has shown the use of physiological modeling environments for identifying predictive interventions to target bioelectric states for repair of embryonic brain defects under a range of genetic and pharmacologically induced teratologies.


== Future research ==
Life is ultimately an electrochemical enterprise; research in this field is progressing along several frontiers. First is the reductive program of understanding how bioelectric signals are produced, how voltage changes in the cell membrane are able to regulate cell behavior, and what the genetic and epigenetic downstream targets of bioelectric signals are. A few mechanisms that transduce bioelectric change into alterations of gene expression are already known, including the bioelectric control of movement of small second-messenger molecules through cells, including serotonin and butyrate, voltage sensitive phosphatases, among others. Also known are numerous gene targets of voltage signaling, such as Notch, BMP, FGF, and HIF-1α. Thus, the proximal mechanisms of bioelectric signaling within single cells are becoming well-understood, and advances in optogenetics and magnetogenetics continue to facilitate this research program. More challenging however is the integrative program of understanding how specific patterns of bioelectric dynamics help control the algorithms that accomplish large-scale pattern regulation (regeneration and development of complex anatomy). The incorporation of bioelectrics with chemical signaling in the emerging field of probing cell sensory perception and decision-making is an important frontier for future work.
Bioelectric modulation has shown control over complex morphogenesis and remodeling, not merely setting individual cell identity. Moreover, a number of the key results in this field have shown that bioelectric circuits are non-local – regions of the body make decisions based on bioelectric events at a considerable distance. Such non-cell-autonomous events suggest distributed network models of bioelectric control; new computational and conceptual paradigms may need to be developed to understand spatial information processing in bioelectrically active tissues. It has been suggested that results from the fields of primitive cognition and unconventional computation are relevant to the program of cracking the bioelectric code. Finally, efforts in biomedicine and bioengineering are developing applications such as wearable bioreactors for delivering voltage-modifying reagents to wound sites, and ion channel-modifying drugs (a kind of electroceutical) for repair of birth defects and regenerative repair. Synthetic biologists are likewise starting to incorporate bioelectric circuits into hybrid constructs.


== References ==


== External links ==
 Quotations related to Developmental bioelectricity at Wikiquote.
Biomagnetics is a field of biotechnology. It has actively been researched since at least 2004. Although the majority of structures found in living organisms are diamagnetic, the magnetic field itself, as well as magnetic nanoparticles, microstructures and paramagnetic molecules can influence specific physiological functions of organisms under certain conditions. The effect of magnetic fields on biosystems is a topic of research that falls under the biomagnetic umbrella, as well as the construction of magnetic structures or systems that are either biocompatible, biodegradable or biomimetic. Magnetic nanoparticles and magnetic microparticles are known to interact with certain prokaryotes and certain eukaryotes.
Magnetic nanoparticles under the influence of magnetic and electromagnetic fields were shown to modulate redox reactions for the inhibition or the promotion of animal tumor growth. The mechanism underlying nanomagnetic modulation involves the convergence of magnetochemical and magneto-mechanical reactions.


== History ==

In 2014, biotechnicians at Monash University noticed that "the efficiency of delivery of DNA vaccines is often relatively low compared to protein vaccines" and on this basis suggested the use of superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs) to deliver genetic materials via magnetofection because it increases the efficiency of drug delivery.
As of 2021, interactions have been studied between low cost iron oxide nanoparticles (IONPs) and the main groups of biomolecules: proteins, lipids, nucleic acids and carbohydrates. There have been suggestions of magnetically targeted drug delivery systems, in particular for the cationic peptide lasioglossin.
Around May 2021 rumours abounded that certain mRNA biotech delivery systems were magnetically active. Prompted by state-owned broadcaster France24, fr:Julien Bobroff who specialises in magnetism and teaches at the University of Paris-Saclay debunked the claims of COVID-19 conspiracy theorists as follows: "A vaccine against Covid-19... that would make magnets stick to the skin once injected is absolutely impossible from a scientific standpoint."


== References ==.
A BioBlitz, also written without capitals as bioblitz, is an intense period of biological surveying in an attempt to record all the living species within a designated area. Groups of scientists, naturalists, and volunteers conduct an intensive field study over a continuous time period (e.g., usually 24 hours). There is a public component to many BioBlitzes, with the goal of getting the public interested in biodiversity. To encourage more public participation, these BioBlitzes are often held in urban parks or nature reserves close to cities. Research into the best practices for a successful BioBlitz has found that collaboration with local natural history museums can improve public participation. As well, BioBlitzes have been shown to be a successful tool in teaching post-secondary students about biodiversity.


== Features ==
A BioBlitz has different opportunities and benefits than a traditional, scientific field study. Some of these potential benefits include:

Enjoyment – Instead of a highly structured and measured field survey, this sort of event has the atmosphere of a festival. The short time frame makes the search more exciting.
Local – The concept of biodiversity tends to be associated with coral reefs or tropical rainforests. A BioBlitz offers the chance for people to visit a nearby setting and see that local parks have biodiversity and are important to conserve.
Science – These one-day events gather basic taxonomic information on some groups of species.
Meet the Scientists – A BioBlitz encourages people to meet working scientists and ask them questions.
Identifying rare and unique species/groups – When volunteers and scientists work together, they are able to identify uncommon or special habitats for protection and management and, in some cases, rare species may be uncovered.
Documenting species occurrence – BioBlitzes do not provide a complete species inventory for a site, but they provide a species list which makes a basis for a more complete inventory and will often show what area or what taxon would benefit from a further study.
Increases interest in science – BioBlitzes helps to build interest from the general public in science and environmental studies by enabling direct communication and inclusive activities.


== History ==
The term "BioBlitz" was first coined by U.S. National Park Service naturalist Susan Rudy while assisting with the first BioBlitz. The first BioBlitz was held at Kenilworth Aquatic Gardens, Washington, D.C. in 1996. Approximately 1000 species were identified at this first event. This first accounting of biodiversity was organized by Sam Droege (USGS) and Dan Roddy (NPS) with the assistance of other government scientists. The public and especially the news media were invited. Since the success of the first bioblitz, many organizations around the world have repeated this concept.
Since then, most BioBlitz contain a public component so that adults, kids, teens and anyone interested can join experts and scientists in the field. Participating in these hands-on field studies is a fun and exciting way for people to learn about biodiversity and better understand how to protect it.
In 1998, Harvard biologist E.O. Wilson and Massachusetts wildlife expert Peter Alden developed a program to catalog the organisms around Walden Pond. This led to a statewide program known as Biodiversity Days. This concept is very similar to a BioBlitz and occasionally the two terms are used interchangeably.
A variation on the BioBlitz, the Blogger Blitz began in 2007. Rather than gather volunteers and scientists at one location, participant blogs pledged to conduct individual surveys of biodiversity. These results were then compiled and mapped. The purpose of this blitz is not to survey down to species level across all taxonomic groups, but rather to raise awareness about biodiversity and provide a general snapshot of diversity.
From 2007 through 2016 National Geographic Society and the US National Park Service partnered to put on a Bioblitz in a different National Park each year culminating in a Bioblitz across the National Park Service in 2016 as part of the National Park Service Centennial Celebration. The iNaturalist platform was used as the recording tool for the 2014, 2015, and 2016 Centennial Bioblitzes in this series.
Highlights of the 2016 nationwide BioBlitz include:

The National Parks BioBlitz—Washington, D.C. was the cornerstone of the national event. Nearly 300 scientists and experts led more than 2,600 students and thousands of members of the general public in all 13 of the National Capital Region's parks. As of the closing ceremony on 21 May, nearly 900 species were recorded from this area alone.
The Biodiversity Festival at Constitution Gardens on the National Mall served as a window to events across the country, with regular live feeds featuring species discoveries on jumbo screens located on the National Mall.
E. O. Wilson, "father of biodiversity", was a significant part of the pre-BioBlitz events, including the Special Speaker Series at the American Association for the Advancement of Science and the 2016 National Parks BioBlitz Scientist Dinner at National Geographic Headquarters on Thursday, 19 May.
The BioBlitz Dance was a common activity throughout the festival weekend. Participants danced with John Griffith, founder of the dance, on the main stage several times at Constitution Gardens, and on the jumbotron from other park units across the nation.
National parks and participating partners shared their BioBlitz activities via social media, using the hashtags #BioBlitz2016 and #FindYourPark. During the weekend's event, #BioBlitz2016 ranked in the top 10 on Twitter!
At Cabrillo National Monument, Green Abalone (Haliotis fulgens) was documented. For the past thirty years, abalone have faced substantial conservation concerns due to overharvesting and disease. Their presence in the Cabrillo Rocky Intertidal Zone can be described as ephemeral at best.
Knife River National Park conducted an ArcheoBlitz. A centuries-old bison tooth was found at Big Hidatsa Village, which was occupied from about 1740 to 1850. DNA extracted from this tooth can provide data on bison populations before their near-extinction at the end of the 19th century, a useful comparison for managers of modern herds.
At Great Smoky Mountain National Park, experts teamed up with about 100 5th graders. Together they set out to explore pollinators and succeeded in discovering nearly 200 species. While it is too early to tell if they found any new species, they have added significant information to the park's database.
Craters of the Moon National Monument and Preserve conducted a lichen survey and added several new species to their park list. One of those identified is Xanthoria elegans. This species of lichen survived an 18-month exposure to solar UV radiation, cosmic rays, vacuum and varying temperatures in an experiment performed by the ESA outside of the ISS.
Channel Islands National Park broadcast a dive with oceanographer and National Geographic Explorer, Dr. Sylvia Earle, with support from the National Park Trust. The feed was featured online and on the jumbotrons on the National Mall and enabled the public to follow the exploration of one of the richest marine ecosystems in the world, the giant kelp forest.
The National Parks BioBlitz used the iNaturalist app to deliver real-time information on species finds. Verified data will be included in National Park Service databases and international databases tracking biodiversity on the planet. This application can be used by parks and citizen scientists well into the future.
Beginning with the 2010 NPS/NGS BioBlitz at Biscayne National Park, NPS initiated a corps of Biodiversity Youth Ambassadors. Each year through 2016, a student ambassador is selected by the host park to participate in the BioBlitz and assist in raising biodiversity awareness to their peers and in their home communities. In addition to the new NCR Biodiversity Youth Ambassador, Ms. Katherine Hagan, Ms. Mikaila Ulmer, 11, was selected to be the National Park Service Biodiversity Youth Ambassador representing the President's Pollinator Conservation Initiative for the National Park Service.


== BioBlitzes by country ==


=== Australia ===
The Woodland Watch Project (part of the World Wide Fund for Nature) (WWF) has organised BioBlitz's in the wheatbelt area of Western Australia in 2002, 2003, 2004, 2006, 2008, 2009 and 2010.
Two 'SpiderBlitz's' (variants of the BioBlitz concept) were organised in 2007 and 2008 in the wheatbelt by WWF to focus attention on threatened trapdoor spiders, and their unique habitats.
Wheatbelt Natural Resource Management Wheatbelt NRM ran a BioBlitz around the wheatbelt town of Korrelocking in 2012.
The Discovery Circle program (UniSA) ran two BioBlitzes at a park in Salisbury and wetlands at Marion, South Australia.
The Atlas of Life in the Coastal Wilderness www.alcw.org.au has run three successful bioblitzes – in Bermagui 2012, Pambula 2014 and Mimosa Rocks National Park 2014. The Atlas of Life works in association with the Atlas of Living Australia (the national biodiversity database)
takayna BioBlitz  The Bob Brown Foundation runs an annual takayna BioBlitz in Tasmania, Australia.  The takayna BioBlitz is a festival of science in nature, held in one of the world's last truly wild places. This event brings together scientists, experts, naturalists and members of the public for a weekend of environmental scientific discovery. See: bobbrown.org.au
Tarkine BioBlitz, 19–22 November 2015, was the first BioBlitz in Tasmania. More than 100 people surveyed moorland, rainforest, rivers and coastline in the remote Tarkine region in support of the Bob Brown Foundation's campaign for a Tarkine National Park to protect the natural values of the region.
Melbourne City Council conducted a BioBlitz in 2014 and 2016, engaging citizens in nature conservation in cities [2].


=== Canada ===
Active Bioblitz

The Robert Bateman Get to Know BioBlitz started in 2010 to celebrate the international year of biodiversity. In a partnership with Parks Canada there were many sites all across Canada which celebrated bioblitzes on the international day of biodiversity (22 May).
British Columbia
There has been an annual BioBlitz in Whistler, BC since 2007. The 2013 BioBlitz reported 497 species.
Metro Vancouver has hosted their annual BioBlitz at Burnaby Lake Regional Park since 2010. This bioblitz has much public participation with many activities including pond-dipping, nature walks and meeting live animals up close. The species count currently stands at 488, including a Western Screech Owl, Red-legged Frog, Brassy Minnows and Common Fern which, despite its name, had never been found in the area before.
Ontario:
The Royal Ontario Museum and several other organizations have sponsored BioBlitz in the Toronto area since 2012, with the 2015 event scheduled for the Don River watershed. The 2014 Humber BioBlitz had over 500 participants and counted 1,560 species, including 2 spiders that were new to Canada.
The Rouge National Urban Park hosted a Bioblitz event on 24 and 25 June 2017. The previous Bioblitz at the park was held in 2013 where over 1700 species of flora and fauna were identified.

New Brunswick:
The New Brunswick Museum has held an annual bioblitz since 2009 in Protected Natural Areas (PNA) around the province. Scientists spend two weeks each year in the field, alternating June in one year with August in the next to catch seasonally available biodiversity. The bioblitz was held in Jacquet River Gorge PNA 2009–2010, Caldonia Gorge PNA in 2011–2012, Grand Lake PNA in 2013–2014, Nepisiguit PNA in 2015–2016, and Spednic Lake PNA in 2017–2018. More information is here. The 2013-2014 bioblitzes were the subject of a documentary
Inactive and historic BioBlitz

The Canadian Biodiversity Institute held numerous BioBlitzes between 1997 and 2001.
Victoria's Beacon Hill has had two BioBlitzes, in April 2007 and October 2007. They successfully gave thanks for the biodiversity of the region. Beacon Hill has since been a site for Arborblitzs, which focus on identifying all the trees within the park.
Saint Mary's University (Halifax) held BioBlitz in Nova Scotia between 2008 and 2010 with the report on the 2010 BioBlitz available here.
The Warren Lake BioBlitz was scheduled for 11–13 August 2011. Warren Lake is on the east side of Cape Breton Highlands National Park. There is a hiking trail which circumnavigates the lake and it will be considered the border of the BioBlitz, i.e., there will be quite an extensive aquatic focus.
Stanley Park in Vancouver held BioBlitz between 2011 and 2013.
Harrison Hot Springs had a BioBlitz in July 2011 to highlight the biodiversity of species in the Fraser Valley.


=== Hong Kong ===
In Traditional Chinese this has been referred to as: 生態速查 (Ecological quick check).
First HK's BioBlitz was organized by Tai Tam Tuk Foundation from 24 to 25 Oct 2015. 50 experts leading 300 secondary students recorded more than 680 species in 30 hours, covering marine, terrestrial and intertidal habitats, in Tai Tam site of special scientific interest (SSSI). This event comes as part of the ‘Biodiversity Festival 2015’, an Agriculture, Fisheries and Conservation Department (AFCD) lead project that encompasses many events, exhibitions and seminars, and is a major section of Hong Kong's Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (BSAP). Highlights included 2 species of moth that are extremely rare and native to Hong Kong, the first official record of coral in Tai Tam Bay and the first official record of juvenile horseshoe crabs on Hong Kong island. Data are made available through an online platform iSpot.
BioBlitz@CityU is a competition in the small wooded park on university campus organized by City University of Hong Kong on 4 March 2016.
On 21–22 Oct 2017, Lung Fu Shan Environmental Education Centre organized their first BioBlitz. This center was jointly established by the Environmental Protection Department of HK Government and The University of Hong Kong in 2008. 100 participants and volunteers found 151 species in Lung Fu Shan with the guidance of 11 experts within 24 hours. In 2018 this was expanded to separate bioblitz surveys into four animal groups: Birds; Butterflies, (other) Insects, and Amphibians and Reptiles. And in 2019 another bioblitz is planned.
Tai Tam Tuk Foundation organized their second BioBlitz on 3–4 Nov 2017. They translated the iNaturalist app and slideshow into Chinese with the help of Hong Kong Explorers Initiative and the technical support of Scott Loarie and Alex Shepard from iNaturalist.org for better data collection among local participants. Also, they organized the pilot self-guided activity "DIY BioBlitz" with the help of Environmental Life Science Society, HKU and the teacher training in this event. Data are made available: https://www.inaturalist.org/projects/hk-bioblitz-2017 This event is subvented by Agriculture, Fisheries and Conservation Department of HK Government.
In January 2019 the Hong Kong BioBlitz @ Hong Kong Park was carried out in Kong Kong Park. Utilizing iNaturalist and experts from the Natural History Museum, London, and Tai Tam Tuk Eco Education Centre.
With popularity of City Nature Challenge in Hong Kong since its first participation in 2018, bioblitzes have increasingly been combined with this and other iNaturalist based challenges such as the Hong Kong Inter-School City Nature Challenge.


=== Hungary ===
BioBlitz Events in Hungary are organized by the Hungarian Biodiversity Research Society http://www.biodiverzitasnap.hu/ since 2006, starting with the eco-village Gyürüfű and its surroundings in Baranya County. Since then the Society organizes BioBlitz Events (called also Biodiversity Days) every year, sometimes even several events a year, during which 60-80 experts and researchers contribute to a profound momentary inventory of a chosen area in Hungary, and from time to time in cross-border areas in joint-projects with neighbour countries. The Hungarian Biodiversity Research Society invites local inhabitants and the interested public to join their events, and focusses in its outreach to young local and regional pupils and their teachers just like students from Hungary and abroad. The BioBlitz Events are taking place in partnership with the local National Park Directories, Municipalities and Civil Organisations. A rather fresh approach is the involvement of high school students during their obligatory community/voluntary work into research and field work in the topics of biodiversity and nature protection based upon long term co-operation contracts with schools and educational centres. The main goals pursued by the Hungarian Biodiversity Research Society are to promote the correct understanding of biodiversity in its true context, based upon data collection, monitoring, research and expertise, passing on knowledge from generation to generation and outreach to the broader public. It also aims to strengthen national and international networks. The results of the BioBlitz Events are published in print and on-line media and serve mainly as fundamentals for maintenance-instructions for protected areas and for appropriate natural-resource management, but also for educational purposes.


=== India ===
On 20 May 2025, the first BioBlitz event took place in Odisha at Nandankanan Wildlife Sanctuary, Bhubaneswar. More than 400 species of various taxa have been documented during the 24 hours of rigorous survey. A total of 50 participants of 30 institutions/organizations have participated in the event.


=== Ireland ===
An Ireland's BioBlitz Event has been held annually since 2010 – established by the National Biodiversity Data Centre http://www.biodiversityireland.ie/ to celebrate International Year of Biodiversity. A unique feature of this event is that it has a number of parks through the island competing against each other to see which site records the most species over a 24hr period. The event is usually held on the third weekend in May each year.
In 2010, the first year it was held, Connemara National Park won the competition having recording 542 species. In 2011, Killareny National Park won the event having recorded an astonishing tally of 1088 species. Crawfordsburn Country Park won in 2012 having recorded 984 species. All of the data are made available through an online mapping system, Biodiversity Maps http://maps.biodiversityireland.ie/# and hard copy species lists are produced http://bioblitz.biodiversityireland.ie/bioblitz-species-lists-now-available/
The event is co-ordinated by the National Biodiversity Data Centre who maintain a special website http://bioblitz.biodiversityireland.ie/ each year so that progress with the event can be tracked on-line.
To cater for the success of BioBlitz in Ireland, support is provided for a special 'Local BioBlitz Challenge' for local sites. Also, on 14–15 June 2013 Limerick City hosts the first Urban BioBlitz in Ireland.
On 1 May 2014, the first Intervarsity BioBlitz was held with support from the National Biodiversity Data Centre. University College Cork, National University of Ireland Galway, Trinity, Dublin City University and Dundalk IT all competed to count Biodiversity on campus, with NUIG being the inaugural winner.


=== Israel ===
On 24 April 2014, the first BioBlitz in Israel took place in Yeruham lake park. The event was supported by Ben Gurion University of the Negev. 531 different species were found. A second Bioblitz is scheduled to take place on 26 March 2015.


=== Malaysia ===
Since 2011 the Malaysian Nature Society has held an annual birdwatching bioblitz named "MY Garden Birdwatch".


=== México ===
Since 2019 the Rancho Komchén de los Pájaros has held an annual bioblitz. Check out the iNaturalist results


=== New Zealand ===

Landcare Research, in conjunction with colleagues in other institutes and agencies, held BioBlitzes in Auckland in 2004, 2005, 2006, and 2008; and in Christchurch in 2005. A BioBlitz was planned for early April 2009 in Christchurch. Other New Zealand BioBlitzes have been held in Hamilton and in Wellington.
The first marine BioBlitz occurred on the Wellington South Coast over a month, since a marine BioBlitz is trickier weatherwise than a terrestrial one.
In March 2012 Forest and Bird organised a BioBlitz on the Denniston Plateau on the West Coast of the South Island. It is the site of the proposed Escarpment Mine Project.
See a List of BioBlitzes in New Zealand.


=== Pakistan ===
The first BioBlitz in Pakistan was organized at Hazarganji Chiltan National Park on 15 April 2023, by The First Steps School.


=== Poland ===
The first BioBlitz in Poland was organized in Sopot in May 2008 by the Polish Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research of the Polish Academy of Sciences.


=== Portugal ===
Faro was the first city in Portugal to have a BioBlitz, in October 2009.


=== Singapore ===
The Singapore National Parks (NParks) Community in Nature (CIN) program have been running BioBlitz in various parks and gardens across Singapore to coincide with the International Day for Biological Diversity.


=== Slovenia ===
Slovene's first BioBlitz took place on 19/20 May 2017, in Draga (in central Slovenia). The event was conducted during the project "Invazivke nikoli ne počivajo: Ozaveščanje o in preprečevanje negativnega vpliva invazivnih vrst na evropsko ogrožene vrste" and supported by the Slovene Ministry of the Environment and Spatial Planning. The event was held in cooperation with Societas herpetologica slovenica, the Botanical Society of Slovenia, the Centre for Cartography of Fauna and Flora, and the Slovene Dragonfly Society. During the event, 124 experts participated and 1,588 different species were found.
BioBlitz Slovenia 2018 was held in Rače (in northeastern Slovenia) on 15/16 June. Altogether, 71 experts from 21 different organisations participated, and at the end of the 24-hour event 934 species or higher taxon were identified. BioBlitz Slovenia 2018 was organised by four NGOs: Societas herpetologica slovenica, the Slovene Dragonfly Society, the Botanical Society of Slovenia, and the Centre for Cartography of Fauna and Flora.
A third BioBlitz Slovenia took place on 17/18 May 2019, in the Lož Karst Field. As a part of the project "Še smo tu – domorodne vrste še nismo izrinjene", it was supported by the Slovene Ministry of the Environment and Spatial Planning. Eighty experts participated and 899 different species were found. BioBlitz Slovenia 2019 was organised by three NGOs: Societas herpetologica slovenica, the Slovene Dragonfly Society, and the Centre for Cartography of Fauna and Flora.
The results of the events are published in print and on-line media and journals, also together with the list of species. BioBlitz Slovenia became a traditional annual event and has its own webpage.


=== Spain ===
In Formentera (Balearic Islands), during the Posidonia Festival 2008, there was a bioblitz.
Barcelona (Catalonia) hosts a BioBlitz yearly since 2010, organized by Barcelona City Council, University of Barcelona and Natural History Museum of Barcelona, in collaboration with several naturalist and scientific societies. First BioBlitzBcn was held in June 2010 at Laberint d'Horta and Parc de la Ciutadella. Second in October 2011 at Jardí Botànic de Barcelona. Third in May 2012 at Jardí Botànic Històric.
The university of Almeria organizes the AmBioBlitz in April yearly since 2018, with the collaboration of CECOUAL (Centre of Scientific Collections of the University of Almería) and Observation.org 
The Pablo de Olavide University, from Seville, will host in April 2021 its first BioBlitz in collaboration with Observation.org and Biological Station of Doñana-CSIC


=== Sweden ===
Sweden's first BioBlitz was organized in Röttle (Gränna) on 4 and 5 August 2012.
On 7 and 8 September 2012 a BioBlitz was organized in Fliseryd near the river Emån. A total of 345 species were reported in this former industrial site on islands in the river.
Sweden's fourth BioBlitz will be organized in Högsby on 5 and 6 June 2014.


=== Taiwan ===
Taipei 228 Peace Park 2008 BioBlitz on 20 December, sponsored by Taiwan Forestry Bureau and National Taiwan Museum, found more than 180 plants, 11 birds and 1 mammal.


=== Trinidad & Tobago ===
Tucker Valley Bioblitz 2012 was the first bioblitz in Trinidad and possibly the Caribbean. It was organised by Mike G. Rutherford, curator of the University of the West Indies Zoology Museum (UWIZM) with help from the Trinidad and Tobago Field Naturalists' Club (TTFNC) and was sponsored by First Citizens Bank. The 24-hour event found 654 species – 211 plants and 443 animals.
Arima Valley Bioblitz 2013 was based at the Asa Wright Nature Centre. The event found 139 vertebrates, 247 invertebrates, 30 fungi, 7 diatoms and 317 plants making a total of 740 species.
Nariva Swamp Bioblitz 2014 was based at the Forestry Division Field Station near Bush Bush Forest Reserve, the teams found 742 species.
Charlotteville Bioblitz 2015 was the first event to take place in Tobago. Based at the Environmental Research Institute Charlotteville (ERIC) there was a large marine component and all together 1,044 species were recorded.
Port of Spain Bioblitz 2016 took the event to the nation's capital and included a Nature Fair with over 20 local NGOs, government organisations and charity groups putting on a biodiversity and environmental display. 762 species were found in and around the city.
Icacos Bioblitz 2017 was the final event organised by Rutherford and took the bioblitz to the far south-west of Trinidad and recorded 769 species.
Toco Bioblitz 2018 was organised by a committee made up of TTFNC members and staff from the University of the West Indies Department of Life Sciences from the St. Augustine campus. The north-east corner of Trinidad yielded 906 species records.


=== Türkiye ===
The first BioBlitz event in Kocaeli Province was held in Ormanya on 17 September 2021, with the support of Kocaeli Metropolitan Municipality. 113 different species were found at the event.


=== United Kingdom ===

Natural History Consortium host the National BioBlitz Network hosting free resources for running a BioBlitz event and the national BioBlitz Calendar. (www.bnhc.org.uk)
Examples of regions and organisations which have held BioBlitz events include:

First UK Marine BioBlitz undertaken by the Marine Biological Association and the Natural History Museum together with other partners. Wembury, South Devon 2009
Bristol – Organised by Bristol Natural History Consortium
Northumberland – Organised by Northumberland Biodiversity Network
New Forest National Park – Organised by New Forest National Park Authority
Swansea – Organised by Swansea City Council
Cairngorms – Organised by Cairngorms Biodiversity
Dundee – Organised by Dundee City Council
Leicester – Organised by Leicester City and County Council
Isle of Wight – Organised by Isle of Wight Council
London – Organised by OPAL
Derby – Organised by Derby City Council
Brighton – Organised by Sussex Wildlife Trust
Bath – Organised by Bristol Natural History Consortium
Mothecombe, Devon, – Marine and coastal BioBlitz – Organised by OPAL and the Marine Biological Association
Jersey – Organised by the Durrell Wildlife Conservation Trust
Fife – Organised by Fife Coast and Countryside Trust and "Celebrating Fife 2010"
Cambridge – Organised by Cambridge University
Lincolnshire – Organised by Lincolnshire Wildlife Trust
Nottingham – Organised by Nottinghamshire Biodiversity Action Group
Flintshire – Organised by Flintshire County Council
North Ayrshire – Organised by North Ayrshire Council
Lancashire – Organised by Lancashire Wildlife Trust
Kent – Organised by Kent Wildlife Trust
Corfe Mullen – Organised by Corfe Mullen Nature Watch
Cornwall – Organised by ERCCIS
North Devon – Organised by Coastwise North Devon.
Sandford – Organised by Ambios
Mount Edgcumb – Marine and coastal bioblitz organised by the Marine Biological Association


=== United States ===
Alaska: The Chugach National Forest and Alaska Department of Fish & Game-Diversity Program organized the first BioBlitz in Southcentral Alaska on 23 and 24 July 2011, to coincide with the International Year of Forests.
Arizona: More than 5,500 people, including 2,000 students and 150 scientists, attended the 2011 Saguaro BioBlitz, (21–22 October) and discovered 859 species during the 24 hour inventory period. Included in that total were more than 400 species, mostly invertebrate animals and non-vascular plants, which were previously unknown in the park. The accompanying Biodiversity Festival had an integrated art program that included pieces featuring local species, created by local students, seniors, and artists.
California: The Santa Monica Mountains NPS/National Geographic Society BioBlitz (30–31 May 2008) was accomplished through collaboration with the Santa Monica Mountains Conservancy, California State Parks, and Los Angeles Recreation and Parks Department. Six thousand participants discovered more than 1,700 species during the 24 hour inventory period.
California: The San Diego Zoo Institute for Conservation Research hosted a BioBlitz in the San Dieguito River Park on the North Shore of Lake Hodges in Escondido 25–26 April.
California: The San Diego Natural History Museum began hosting a yearly BioBlitz starting in 2008. The 2008 BioBlitz was held in Balboa Park and in 2009 the event was held at Mission Trails Regional Park on 1–2 May.
California: The Santa Barbara Botanic Garden organized a BioBlitz of its natural spaces in May 2007.
California: Golden Gate National Recreation Area: On 28–29 March 2014, participants in the BioBlitz at Golden Gate Park sites, including Pt. Reyes National Seashore, Muir Woods National Monument, the Presidio of San Francisco, Mori Point, and Rancho Corral de Tierra observed and recorded biodiversity in habitats ranging from the redwood canopy to windswept beaches. Highlights included the first ever canopy survey of redwoods at Muir Woods, the first-ever, park sighting of a climbing salamander in Muir Woods; sightings of great horned, spotted, barred and saw-whet owls; and a mountain lion at Corral de Tierra.
Colorado: The National Wildlife Federation has been providing a toolset based on the eNature.com species data in the Denver/Boulder metropolitan area since 2004. Results are online.
Colorado: On 24–25 August 2012, more than 150 scientists joined forces with 5,000 people of all ages and backgrounds to seek out the living creatures in Rocky Mountain National Park. Inventories took place in various ecological life zones, including ponderosa pine forests, the subalpine region, the tundra, and mountain meadows. Among the overall total of 490 species discovered, 138 were previously unknown to be in the park. A companion festival at the Estes Park Fairgrounds advanced and celebrated public awareness of biodiversity.
Connecticut: The Center for Conservation and Biodiversity and Connecticut State Museum of Natural History have held nine BioBlitz events since 1999. The current record for a single Connecticut BioBlitz was set 3–4 June 2016 in a 5-mile radius around the Two Rivers Magnet School in East Hartford, where 2,765 species were recorded in the 24-hour period. Many of the organisms sighted in the 2016 BioBlitz were documented in an online iNaturalist project. The previous record was set in 2001 at Tarrywile Park in Danbury, where 2,519 species were recorded in the 24-hour period.
District of Columbia: A BioBlitz at the Kenilworth Park and Aquatic Gardens in Washington, D.C. in 1996 found approximately 1000 species.
Washington, D.C. 2007: The National Geographic Society held a BioBlitz in Rock Creek Park on 18–19 May. The event was later on a segment of the TV series Wild Chronicles which airs on PBS. Participants included J. Michael Fay, Sylvia Earle, and Boyd Matson. The first National Park Service/National Geographic Society BioBlitz took place on 18–19 May 2007. A wide breadth of taxonomic groups was examined, including amphibians and reptiles, invertebrates, birds, fish, fungi, mammals, plants, insects, and more. The total number of species found was 661 over a 24-hour period.
Florida: In Manatee County, the local government's Department of Natural Resources (formerly Conservation Lands Management) has sponsored annual BioBlitz events, every spring since 2007. The surveys rotate between the county's different parks and preserves. This event, however, involves only a 12-hour survey instead of the standard 24-hour.
Florida: On 30 April – 1 May 2010, 2,500 citizen scientists worked with their professional counterparts to explore life in one of the nation's largest marine national parks, Biscayne National Park. More than 800 species were found, including a number of species rare to the park, such as the mangrove cuckoo, and silver hairstreak butterfly. Also, 11 species of lichen and 22 species of ants were found that had not previously been documented in the park.
Hawaii: At Punahou School, a biannual BioBlitz is organized by the students. The event examines certain parts of the campus, and has been held there since the summer of 2008. The BioBlitz there happens once in winter, and once in summer.
Hawai'i: at Hawai'i Volcanoes National Park in 2015, working under the theme of I ka nānā no a ’ike ("By observing, one Learns"), traditional Hawaiian cultural practitioners, "alakai’i," were integrated into the survey teams, providing a holistic approach to the research and exploration activities. More than 170 leading scientists and alakai’i, teamed with thousands of public participants of all ages to explore one of the most fascinating biological landscapes in the world. Together they documented species that thrive in ecosystems from sea level to the summit of Kīlauea Volcano. Exciting finds included 22 new species added to the park's species list, and sightings of 73 threatened species, including the nēnē and Kamehameha butterfly. The number of fungi species on the park's list more than doubled, with 17 new fungi documented at the close of the event.
Illinois: The Field Museum of Natural History and other organizations held a BioBlitz in Chicago in 2002. There are several bioblitzes in parts of the forest preserves of Cook and Lake County.
Indiana: Indiana Dunes National Park – On 16 May 2009, more than 150 scientists, assisted by 2,000 grade school students and other members of the public, explored the sand dunes, lake shore, forests, wetlands, prairie, and streams of the recreation area. The excitement persevered through driving rain and high winds and resulted in the discovery of more than 1,200 species.
Louisiana: The NPS/National Geographic Society BioBlitz at Jean Lafitte National Historical Park and Preserve (17–18 May 2013), brought together leading scientists and naturalists from around the country and local citizens of all ages. Inventories included herpetofaunal counts, aquatic and terrestrial invertebrate inventories, avifauna observations, and native and non-native plant surveys. Participants also used technology, such as tree cameras and smartphones, to record and understand the diverse ecosystems of this unique national park. At the time of the event's closing ceremony, 458 species had been identified, including a rare Louisiana milk snake, 288 plants, and 122 invertebrate species.
Maine: The Maine Entomological Society and other organizations have been holding Entomological BioBlitzes at Acadia National Park every summer since 2003. Results of the 2003-2011 blitzes were summarized by Chandler et al., 2012, showing that 1,605 species representing 348 families of insects were taken and identified over the 8-year period. Many were new to the Park fauna, and a significant number were also new to the known state fauna.
Maryland/DC/Virginia, 2006: The Nature Conservancy sponsored a Potomac Gorge BioBlitz where more than 130 field biologists and experienced naturalists volunteered their expertise in an effort to see how many species they could find. During a 30-hour survey period from Saturday, 24 June, through Sunday, 25 June their surveys revealed more than 1,000 species.
Maryland: Jug Bay BioBlitz was sponsored by the Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission's (M-NCPPC) Patuxent River Park staff and rangers, 30–31 May 2009.
Massachusetts
2006 collaboration between the Boston Museum of Science and the Cape Cod Museum of Natural History. The first bioblitz in a series sponsored by the E.O. Wilson Biodiversity Foundation. The first bioblitz to utilize CyberTracker and NatureMapping technologies for data collection.
On 25–26 June 2010, a BioBlitz was held in Falmouth, Massachusetts, using town conservation land and adjacent land owned by the 300 Committee (T3C), Falmouth's land trust. Surveys for 15 taxa were planned. About 120 volunteers participated. Preliminary estimate of 930 species found but this number is likely to increase as data are finalized. Full results to be published later in 2010 on the T3C website.
On 29 September 2010, the TDWG Techno/BioBlitz was held alongside the Annual Biodiversity Information Standards Conference in Woods Hole.
On 8 July 2019, the Great Walden BioBlitz was held at Walden Pond, Massachusetts, surveying a five-mile radius around Walden Woods. Organized by Peter Alden in honor of E.O. Wilson's 90th birthday and the 30th Massachusetts bioblitz, public participants were encouraged to explore Walden Woods and Minute Man NHP using the iNaturalist phone app to help document species.
Minnesota: A group of organizations including the Bell Museum of Natural History has sponsored BioBlitzes in natural areas in or near the Twin Cities yearly in June since 2004.
Missouri: Sponsored by the Academy of Science of St. Louis, partners from the public, academic and corporate sectors collaborate on the Academy of Science-St. Louis BioBlitz at urban parks, such as Forest Park in St Louis . Held at least once a year since 2006, the academy's BioBlitz has hosted future BioBlitz leaders from throughout the country and is a signature event of one of the oldest Academies of Science in the USA. www.academyofsciencestl.org
New Hampshire:
Odiorne Point State Park: The Seacoast Science Center has been hosting an annual BioBlitz! in September since 2003. The park's diversity of coastal habitats provides BioBlitzers the opportunity to find marine, freshwater and terrestrial species. The Center compiles and maintains each year's data.
Squam Lakes. 2008. The Squam Lakes Natural Science Center in collaboration with Squam Lakes Association and Squam Lakes Conservation Society in cooperation with the Holderness Conservation Commission, the US Forest Service Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest, UNH Cooperative Extension, Plymouth State University, NH Fish and Game Department, and Ecosystem Management Consultants.
New Jersey State
Highlands, NJ
Gateway National Recreation Area, Sandy Hook Unit, 2011. On 16–17 Sept., science students, along with park staff and over 150 volunteers, located nearly 450 species, mostly birds, terrestrial plants and invertebrates.
Gateway National Recreation Area, Sandy Hook Unit, 2015. On 18–19 September, the American Littoral Society, in partnership with the National Park Service, hosted the second Sandy Hook BioBlitz. Over 150 scientists, naturalists, and volunteers raced against the clock to identify as many species as possible. This BioBlitz found 75 birds, 12 fungi/lichen, 21 fish, 2 reptiles/amphibians, 44 marine invertebrates, 2 insects, 13 mammals, 15 aquatic plants, and 87 terrestrial plants.
New York State
New York City
Central Park, 2003. This BioBlitz found more than 800 species, including 393 species of plants, 78 of moths, 14 fungi, 10 spiders, 9 dragonflies, 2 tardigrades, 102 other invertebrates, 7 mammals, 3 turtles, 46 birds and 2 frog species. s.
Central Park, 2006. In collaboration with the E.O. Wilson Biodiversity Foundation, the Explorers Club, the American Museum of Natural History and the Boston Museum of Science. This is the first bioblitz in history to incorporate the collection and analysis of microorganisms.
Central Park, 2013. On 27–28 August 2013 a BioBlitz at Central Park was held in partnership with Macaulay Honors College of CUNY. With help from the Central Park Conservancy over 350 Macaulay students worked with nearly 30 scientists and cataloged more than 460 species.
New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx, 2014, 6 and 7 September, in partnership with Macaulay Honors College of CUNY.
The Saw Mill River watershed in Westchester County, September 2009. Groundwork Hudson Valley, leading the Saw Mill River Coalition, conducted a Saw Mill River BioBlitz on 25–26 September with more than 50 scientists from a wide variety of fields. A concurrent conference on the health of the river was held at Pace University in Pleasantville that was open to the public and had activities geared for children. Funded by a grant from Westchester Community Foundation with additional support from US EPA and NYS/DEC Hudson River Estuary Program. Major co-sponsors joining the effort were Westchester County Parks, Recreation and Conservation; Teatown Lake Reservation; Pace University's Department of Biology and Health Sciences; Pace University's Academy for Applied Environmental Studies; Sigma Xi: The Scientific Research Society; Greenburgh Nature Center; and the Saw Mill River Audubon.
North Carolina: The North Carolina Botanical Garden in collaboration with the Morehead Planetarium sponsor an annual bioblitz in September on garden-owned property.
Ohio: The Geauga Park District has hosted an annual BioBlitz at different park district properties since 2003.
Oklahoma: The Oklahoma Biological Survey hosted an annual BioBlitz at different locations around Oklahoma starting in 2001. Their 2010 BioBlitz will be held on 8–9 October at Kaw Lake in north-central Oklahoma with a base camp at Camp McFadden.
Pennsylvania: Phipps Conservatory hosted a Bioblitz on 10 June 2018, in Pittsburgh.
Rhode Island: Rhode Island Natural History Survey has conducted a BioBlitz at a different site in the state every year since 2000, including a "backyard bioblitz" held in 2020, during COVID. Rhode Island BioBlitz may be the longest running annual BioBlitz in the world. In the 23 events through 2022, the average participation is 163 and the average species count is 1022; the record participation of 302 people and the record species count of 1,308 species were both in the Jamestown Rhode Island BioBlitz of 2012.
Vermont: The Vermont Institute of Natural Science held a BioBlitz in 2004 at Hartford.
Washington: BioBlitzes conducted using NatureTracker software on PDAs for conservation planning./
Wisconsin: The Milwaukee Public Museum (MPM) hosts an annual BioBlitz program that began in 2015. MPM events have occurred at Schlitz Audubon Nature Center in Milwaukee (2015), Grant Park in South Milwaukee (2016), Fox River Park in Waukesha (2017), Lake Farm County Park/Capitol Springs Recreation Area in Madison (2018), Riveredge Nature Center in Saukville (2019), and Whitnall Park in Franklin (2020). The non-profit Biodiversity Project held three Great Lakes BioBlitzes with support from the Wisconsin Coastal Management Program and NOAA in 2004. The sites were Riverside Park in Milwaukee; Baird Creek Parkway in Green Bay; and Wisconsin Point in Superior.


== See also ==
Australian Bird Count (ABC)
Bush Blitz an Australian Government variant of the concept co funded by BHP Billiton and with the participation of Earthwatch Australia
Breeding Bird Survey
Christmas Bird Count (CBC) (in the Western Hemisphere)
City Nature Challenge
Seabird Colony Register (SCR)
The EBCC Atlas of European Breeding Birds
Tucson Bird Count (TBC) (in Arizona, US)


== References ==


== External links ==
BioBlitzes at National Geographic
National BioBlitz Network (United Kingdom) Archived 1 April 2010 at the Wayback Machine.
ARKive was a global initiative with the mission of "promoting the conservation of the world's threatened species, through the power of wildlife imagery", which it did by locating and gathering films, photographs and audio recordings of the world's species into a centralised digital archive. Its priority was the completion of audio-visual profiles for the c. 17,000 species on the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species.
The project was an initiative of Wildscreen, a UK-registered educational charity, based in Bristol. The technical platform was created by Hewlett-Packard, as part of the HP Labs' Digital Media Systems research programme.
ARKive had the backing of leading conservation organisations, including BirdLife International, Conservation International, International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), the United Nations' World Conservation Monitoring Centre (UNEP-WCMC), and the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF), as well as leading academic and research institutions, such as the Natural History Museum; Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew; and the Smithsonian Institution. It was a member of the Institutional Council of the Encyclopedia of Life.
Two ARKive layers for Google Earth, featuring endangered species and species in the Gulf of Mexico were produced by Google Earth Outreach. The first of these was launched in April 2008 by Wildscreen's Patron, Sir David Attenborough.
Due to lack of funding, the website was closed on 15 February 2019 and the media collection taken offline. Its successor, Wildscreen ARK (https://wildscreenark.org/), was launched in February 2024.


== History ==

The project formally was launched on 20 May 2003 by its patron, the UK-based natural history presenter, Sir David Attenborough, a long-standing colleague and friend of its chief instigator, the late Christopher Parsons, a former Head of the BBC Natural History Unit. Parsons never lived to see the fruition of the project, succumbing to cancer in November 2002 at the age of 70.
Parsons identified a need to provide a centralised safe haven for wildlife films and photographs after discovering that many such records are held in scattered, non-indexed, collections, often with little or no public access, and sometimes in conditions that could lead to loss or damage. He believed the records could be a powerful force in building environmental awareness by bringing scientific names to life. He also saw their preservation as an important educational resource and conservation tool, not at least because extinction rates and habitat destruction could mean that images and sounds might be the only legacy of some species' existence.
His vision of a permanent, accessible, refuge for audio-visual wildlife material won almost immediate support from many of the world's major broadcasters, including the BBC, Granada, international state broadcasting corporations and National Geographic magazine; leading film and photographic libraries, international conservation organisations and academic institutes such as Cornell University.
The initial feasibility study for creating ARKive was carried out in the late 1980s by conservationist John Burton, but at the time the costs of the technology needed were too far too high, and so it was over a decade later, after the technology had caught up with Christopher Parsons's vision (and the costs dropped), that the project was able to get off the ground.
After capital development funds of £2m were secured from the Heritage Lottery Fund in 1997 and New Opportunities Fund in 2000, work on building ARKive began as part of the UK's Millennium celebrations, using advanced computerised storage and retrieval technology devised for the project by Hewlett-Packard, with an initial capacity of up to 74 terabytes of data, using redundant hardware and multiple copies of media stored at multiple sites. Media was digitised to the highest available quality without compression and encoded to open standards.
A prototype site was online as early as April 1999. There were several design iterations before the formal launch.
By the launch date, the project team had researched, catalogued, copied, described and authenticated image, sound and fact files of 1,000 animals, plants and fungi, many of them critically endangered. More multi-media profiles are added every month, starting with British flora and fauna and with species included on the Red List – that is, species that are believed to be closest to extinction, according to research by the World Conservation Union. By January 2006, the database had grown to 2,000 species, 15,000 still images and more than 50 hours of videos. By 2010, over 5,500 donors had contributed 70,000 film clips and photos of more than 12,000 species.
In February 2019, Wildscreen announced that they "...have had to make the very hard decision to close the Arkive website on 15 February 2019", due to funding issues. On that date the website was replaced with a short statement, concluding:

The complete Arkive collection of over 100,000 images and videos is now being stored securely offline for future generations.


== Recognition ==
The site was Sunday Times website of the year for 2005. It was a 2010 Webby Award honouree for its outstanding calibre of work, in the 'Education' category, and a 2010 Association of Educational Publishers 'Distinguished Achievement Award' winner, in the category for websites for 9-to-12-year-olds.


== See also ==
Catalogue of Life
Encyclopedia of Life
List of online encyclopaedias


== References ==


== External links ==

Official ARKive site
Technical specifications from Hewlett-Packard
Memorandum of Understanding with Encyclopedia of Life.
In botany, an infraspecific name is the scientific name for any taxon below the rank of species, i.e. an infraspecific taxon or infraspecies. The scientific names of botanical taxa are regulated by the International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants (ICN). As specified by the ICN, the name of an infraspecific taxon is a combination of the name of a species and an infraspecific epithet, separated by a connecting term that denotes the rank of the taxon. An example of an infraspecific name is Astrophytum myriostigma subvar. glabrum, the name of a subvariety of the species Astrophytum myriostigma (bishop's hat cactus). In the previous example, glabrum is the infraspecific epithet.
Names below the rank of species of animals and of cultivated plants are regulated by different codes of nomenclature and are formed somewhat differently.


== Construction of infraspecific names ==
Article 24 of the ICN describes how infraspecific names are constructed. The order of the three parts of an infraspecific name is:

genus name, specific epithet, connecting term indicating the rank (not part of the name, but required), infraspecific epithet.
It is customary to italicize all three parts of such a name, but not the connecting term. For example:

Acanthocalycium klimpelianum var. macranthum
genus name = Acanthocalycium, specific epithet = klimpelianum, connecting term = var. (short for "varietas" or variety), infraspecific epithet = macranthum
Astrophytum myriostigma subvar. glabrum
genus name = Astrophytum, specific epithet = myriostigma, connecting term = subvar. (short for "subvarietas" or subvariety), infraspecific epithet = glabrum
The recommended abbreviations for ranks below species are:

subspecies - recommended abbreviation: subsp. (but "ssp." is also in use although not recognised by Art 26)
varietas (variety) - recommended abbreviation: var.
subvarietas (subvariety) -  recommended abbreviation: subvar.
forma (form) -  recommended abbreviation: f.
subforma (subform) -  recommended abbreviation: subf.
Although the connecting terms mentioned above are the recommended ones, the ICN allows for other connecting terms in validly published infraspecific taxa.  It specifically mentions that Greek letters α, β, γ, etc. can be used in this way in the original document and further ranks may be added without limit.  Names that use these connecting terms are now deprecated (though still legal), but they have an importance because they can be basionyms of current species.  The commonest cases use "β" and "b"; examples mentioned in the ICN are Cynoglossum cheirifolium β Anchusa (lanata) and Polyporus fomentarius β applanatus whilst other examples (coming from the fungus database Index Fungorum) are Agaricus plexipes b fuliginaria and Peziza capula ß cernua.  The ICN allows the possibility that a validly published name could have no defined rank and uses "[unranked]" as the connecting term in such cases.


== Abbreviation of infraspecific names ==
Like specific epithets, infraspecific epithets cannot be used in isolation as names. Thus the name of a particular species of Acanthocalycium is Acanthocalycium klimpelianum, which can be abbreviated to A. klimpelianum where the context makes the genus clear. The species cannot be referred to as just klimpelianum. In the same way, the name of a particular variety of Acanthocalycium klimpelianum is Acanthocalycium klimpelianum var. macranthum, which can be abbreviated to A. k. var. macranthum where the context makes the species clear. The variety cannot be referred to as just macranthum.
Sometimes more than three parts will be given; strictly speaking, this is not a name, but a classification. The ICN gives the example of Saxifraga aizoon var. aizoon subvar. brevifolia f. multicaulis subf. surculosa; the name of the subform would be Saxifraga aizoon subf. surculosa.


== Legitimate infraspecific names ==
For a proposed infraspecific name to be legitimate it must be in accordance with all the rules of the ICN. Only some of the main points are described here.
A key concept in botanical names is that of a type. In many cases the type will be a particular preserved specimen stored in a herbarium, although there are other kinds of type. Like other names, an infraspecific name is attached to a type. Whether a plant should be given a particular infraspecific name can then be decided by comparing it to the type.
There is no requirement for a species to be divided into infraspecific taxa, of whatever rank; in other words, a species does not have to have subspecies, varieties, forms, etc. However, if infraspecific ranks are created, then the name of the type of the species must repeat the specific epithet as its infraspecific epithet. The type acquires this name automatically as soon as any infraspecific rank is created. As an example, consider Poa secunda J.Presl, whose type specimen is in the Wisconsin State Herbarium.

As soon as a subspecies of Poa secunda  was created, then the type specimen of P. secunda  immediately became the type specimen of Poa secunda subsp. secunda. The name "Poa secunda subsp. secunda" was automatically created (it is an "autonym"). Soreng created the subspecies Poa secunda subsp. juncifolia (whose type specimen is also in the Wisconsin State Herbarium), thereby making the type specimen of P. secunda also the type specimen of Poa secunda subsp. secunda.
If in addition to the subspecies any variety of Poa secunda were to be created, then the type specimen of P. secunda  would automatically become the type specimen of Poa secunda var. secunda. The type specimen would then have the classification Poa secunda subsp. secunda var. secunda.
The same epithet can be used again within a species, at whatever level, only if the names with the re-used epithet are attached to the same type. Thus there can be a form called Poa secunda f. juncifolia as well as the subspecies Poa secunda subsp. juncifolia if, and only if, the type specimen of Poa secunda f. juncifolia is the same as the type specimen of Poa secunda subsp. juncifolia (in other words, if there is a single type specimen whose classification is Poa secunda subsp. juncifolia f. juncifolia).
If two infraspecific taxa which have different types are accidentally given the same epithet, then a homonym has been created. The earliest published name is the legitimate one and the other must be changed.


== Specifying authors ==
When indicating authors for infraspecific names, it is possible to show either just the author(s) of the final, infraspecific epithet, or the authors of both the specific and the infraspecific epithets, as is demonstrated throughout the ICN. Examples:

Adenia aculeata subsp. inermis de Wilde
This identifies de Wilde as the author who published this name for the subspecies (i.e. who created the epithet inermis). Note that here it was decided not to indicate authority for the species.
Pinus nigra J.F.Arnold subsp. salzmannii (Dunal) Franco
Here, J.F.Arnold is the author who gave the species, European black pine, its botanical name Pinus nigra; Dunal is the author who was the first to publish the epithet salzmanii for this taxon (as the species Pinus salzmanii); Franco is the author who reduced the taxon to a subspecies of Pinus nigra.


== Difference from zoological nomenclature ==
In zoological nomenclature, names of taxa below species rank are formed somewhat differently, using a trinomen or 'trinomial name'. No connecting term is required as there is only one rank below species, the subspecies.


== Difference from prokaryotic nomenclature ==
The Prokaryotic Code was split from the ICN in 1975. This nomenclature only governs one infraspecific rank, the subspecies, but allows a number of infrasubspecific subdivisions to be used. The authorship is to be specified in the form "Bacillus subtilis subsp. spizizenii Nakamura et al. 1999.", i.e. with only the infraspecific author.
Authors may still choose to use ungoverned ranks such as sv. (serovar) and pv. (pathovar).


== Cultivated plants ==
The ICN does not regulate the names of cultivated plants, of cultivars, i.e. plants specifically created for use in agriculture or horticulture. Such names are regulated by the International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP).
Although logically below the rank of species (and hence "infraspecific"), a cultivar name may be attached to any scientific name at the genus level or below. The minimum requirement is to specify a genus name. For example, Achillea 'Cerise Queen' is a cultivar; Pinus nigra 'Arnold Sentinel' is a cultivar of the species P. nigra (which is propagated vegetatively, by cloning).


== See also ==
International Code of Zoological Nomenclature
International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants
Cultivar
Strain (biology)
Race (biology)
Variant (biology)
Forma specialis, an informal naming system for parasites that is included in the botanical code of nomenclature
Pathovar, a system for naming parasitic bacteria


== References ==


== Bibliography ==
Turland, N.J.; et al., eds. (2017), International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants (Shenzhen Code) adopted by the Nineteenth International Botanical Congress Shenzhen, China, July 2017, vol. Regnum Vegetabile 154 (electronic ed.), Glashütten: International Association for Plant Taxonomy, retrieved 2019-02-21.
In bacteriology, a taxon in disguise is a species, genus or higher unit of biological classification whose evolutionary history reveals that it has evolved from another unit of a similar or lower rank, making the parent unit paraphyletic. That happens when rapid evolution makes a new species appear so radically different from the ancestral group that it is not (initially) recognised as belonging to the parent phylogenetic group, which is left as an evolutionary grade.
While the term is from bacteriology, parallel examples are found throughout the tree of life. For example, four-footed animals have evolved from piscine ancestors but since they are not generally considered fish, they can be said to be "fish in disguise".
In many cases, the paraphyly can be resolved by reclassifying the taxon in question under the parent group. However, in bacteriology, since renaming groups may have serious consequences by causing confusion over the identity of pathogens, it is generally avoided for some groups.


== Examples ==


=== Shigella ===
The bacterial genus Shigella is the cause of bacillary dysentery, a potentially-severe infection that kills over a million people every year. The genus (S. dysenteriae, S. flexneri, S. boydii, S. sonnei) have evolved from the common intestinal bacterium Escherichia coli, which renders that species paraphyletic. E. coli itself can also cause serious dysentery, but differences in genetic makeup between E. coli and Shigella cause different medical conditions and symptoms.
Escherichia coli is a poorly-classified species as some strains share only 20% of their genome. The species has proven to be quite diversive and should ideally be subdivided into further taxonomic groups. However, medical conditions associated with E. coli and Shigella complicate reclassification in an attempt to avoid causing confusion in medical contexts. As such, Shigella and several sub-branches of E. coli remain undivided despite genomic evidence suggesting otherwise.


=== B. cereus-group ===
Similarly, the Bacillus species of the B. cereus-group (B. anthracis, B. cereus, B . thuringiensis, B. mycoides, B. pseudomycoides, B. weihenstephanensis and B. medusa) have 99-100% similar 16S rRNA sequence (97% is a commonly-cited adequate species limit) and should be considered a single species. Some members of the group appear to have arisen from other Bacillus strains by acquiring a protein coding plasmid and so the group may thus be polyphyletic. For medical reasons, such as anthrax, the current arrangement of separate species has remained intact.


=== Large genera of microbes ===
The bacterial genus Pseudomonas has enlarged through several generations of taxonomic methods, bringing the species count to alarming proportions, with around 800 species recognized by the mid-20th century. The nitrogen-fixing bacteria of the genus Azotobacter and the species Azomonas macrocytogenes have evolved from a species in the genus Pseudomonas. Its nitrogen-fixing capabilities and deviant features have caused Azotobacter to be described as "Pseudomonas in disguise".
The genus Bacillus was described early in the history of microbiology and so is a large genus that is very genetically diverse, 266 species. The genera Paenibacillus and Brevibacillus are clades that are nested within Bacillus. Since Bacillus is highly medically relevant and Paenibacillus is a model organism that is used in research, renaming them to reflect phylogeny would result in confusion.


== See also ==
Monophyly
Paraphyly
Polyphyly
Species problem
Evolutionary grade
Cryptic species complex
Synonym (taxonomy)
Taxonomy
LPSN, a list of accepted bacterial and archaeal names
Bacterial phyla, a complex classification scheme
Cyanobacteria, a phylum of common bacteria that remain poorly classified


== References ==.
An adult is an animal that has reached full growth. The biological definition of adult is an organism that has reached sexual maturity and thus capable of reproduction. 
In the human context, the term adult has meanings associated with legal and social concepts. In contrast to a non-adult or "minor", a legal adult is a person who has attained the age of majority and is therefore regarded as independent, self-sufficient, and responsible. They may also be regarded as "majors". The typical age of attaining adulthood for humans is 18 years, although definition may vary by country. A person may be physically mature and a biological adult by age 16 or so, but not defined as an adult by law until older ages. For example, in the US, you cannot join the armed forces or vote until age 18, and you cannot take on many legal and financial responsibilities until age 21.
Human adulthood encompasses psychological adult development. Definitions of adulthood are often inconsistent and contradictory; a person may be biologically an adult, and have adult behavior, but still be treated as a child if they are under the legal age of majority. Conversely, one may legally be an adult but possess none of the maturity and responsibility that may define an adult character.
In different cultures, there are events that relate passing from being a child to becoming an adult or coming of age. This often encompasses passing a series of tests to demonstrate that a person is prepared for adulthood, or reaching a specified age, sometimes in conjunction with demonstrating preparation. Most modern societies determine legal adulthood based on reaching a legally specified age without requiring a demonstration of physical maturity or preparation for adulthood.


== Biological adulthood ==
Historically and cross-culturally, adulthood has been determined primarily by the start of puberty (the appearance of secondary sex characteristics such as menstruation and the development of breasts in women, ejaculation, the development of facial hair, and a deeper voice in men, and pubic hair in both sexes). In the past, a person usually moved from the status of child directly to the status of adult, often with this shift being marked by some type of coming-of-age test or ceremony. During the Industrial Revolution, children went to work as soon as they could in order to help provide for their family. There was not a huge emphasis on school or education in general. Many children could get a job and were not required to have experience as adults are nowadays.  In recent years, studies of adulthood have identified characteristic traits that go far beyond mere physical maturity. These markers for a full, mentally developed, adult include traits of personal responsibilities in multiple aspects of life.
Although few or no established dictionaries provide a definition for the two-word term biological adult, the first definition of adult in multiple dictionaries includes "the stage of the life cycle of an animal after reproductive capacity has been attained". Thus, the base definition of the word adult is the period beginning at physical sexual maturity, which occurs sometime after the onset of puberty. Although this is the primary definition of the base word "adult", the term is also frequently used to refer to social adults. The two-word term biological adult stresses or clarifies that the original definition, based on physical maturity (i.e. having reached reproductive competency), is being used.
The time of puberty varies from child to child, but usually begins between 10 and 12 years old. Girls typically begin the process of puberty at age 10 or 11, and boys at age 11 or 12. Girls generally complete puberty by 15–17, and boys by age 16 or 17. Nutrition, genetics and environment also usually play a part in the onset of puberty. Girls will go through a growth spurt and gain weight in several areas of their body. Boys will go through similar spurts in growth, though it is usually not in a similar style or time frame. This is due to the natural processes of puberty, but genetics also plays a part in how much weight they gain or how much taller they get.
One recent area of debate within the science of brain development is the most likely chronological age for full mental maturity, or indeed, if such an age even exists. Common claims repeated in the media since 2005 (based upon interpretations of imaging data) have commonly suggested an "end-point" of 25, referring to the prefrontal cortex as one area that is not yet fully mature at the age of 18. However, this is based on an interpretation of a brain imaging study by Jay Giedd, dating back to 2004 or 2005, where the only participants were aged up to 21 years, and Giedd assumed this maturing process would be done by the age of 25 years, whereas more recent studies show prefrontal cortex maturation continuing well past the age of 30 years, marking this interpretation as incorrect and outdated.


== Legal adulthood ==

Legally, adulthood typically means that one has reached the age of majority – when parents lose parental rights and responsibilities regarding the person concerned. Depending on one's jurisdiction, the age of majority may or may not be set independently of and should not be confused with the minimum ages applicable to other activities, such as engaging in a contract, marriage, voting, having a job, serving in the military, buying/possessing firearms, driving, traveling abroad, involvement with alcoholic beverages, smoking, sexual activity, gambling, being a model or actor in pornography, running for president, etc. Admission of a young person to a place may be restricted because of danger for that person, concern that the place may lead the person to immoral behavior, or because of the risk that the young person causes damage (for example, at an exhibition of fragile items).
One can distinguish the legality of acts of a young person, or of enabling a young person to carry out that act, by selling, renting out, showing, permitting entrance, allowing participation, etc. There may be distinction between commercially and socially enabling. Sometimes there is the requirement of supervision by a legal guardian, or just by an adult. Sometimes there is no requirement, but rather a recommendation.
Using the example of pornography, one can distinguish between:

being allowed inside an adult establishment
being allowed to purchase pornography
being allowed to possess pornography
another person being allowed to sell, rent out, or show the young person pornography, see disseminating pornography to a minor
being a pornographic actor: rules for the young person, and for other people, regarding production, possession, etc. (see child pornography)
With regard to films with violence, etc.:

another person being allowed to sell, rent out, or show the young person a film; a cinema being allowed to let a young person enter
The age of majority ranges internationally from ages 15 to 21, with 18 being the most common age. Nigeria, Mali, Democratic Republic of Congo and Cameroon define adulthood at age 15, but marriage of girls at an earlier age is common.
In most of the world, the legal adult age is 18 for most purposes, with some notable exceptions:

The legal age of adulthood in British Columbia, New Brunswick, Newfoundland and Labrador, Northwest Territories, Nova Scotia, Nunavut, and Yukon in Canada is 19 (though there are some exceptions in which Canadians may be considered legal adults in certain situations like sexual consent, which is age 16, and criminal law, federal elections and the military, which is at 18);
The legal age of adulthood in Nebraska and Alabama in the United States is 19.
The legal age of adulthood in South Korea is 19.
The legal age of adulthood in Mississippi and Puerto Rico in the U.S. and Bahrain is 21.
Prior to the 1970s, young people were not classed as adults until 21 in most western nations. For example, in the United States, young citizens could not vote in many elections until 21 until July 1971 when the 26th Amendment passed mandating that the right to vote cannot be abridged for anyone 18 or older. The voting age was lowered in response to the fact that young men between the ages of 18 and 21 were drafted into the army to fight in the Vietnam War, hence the popular slogan "old enough to fight, old enough to vote" 
Young people under 21 in the US could also not purchase alcohol, purchase handguns, sign a binding contract, or marry without permission from parents. After the voting age was lowered, many states also moved to lower the drinking age (with most states having a minimum age of 18 or 19) and also to lower the age of legal majority (adulthood) to 18. However, there are legal activities where 18 is not the default age of adulthood. There are still some exceptions where 21 (or even higher) is still the benchmark for certain rights or responsibilities. For example, in the US the Gun Control Act of 1968 prohibits those under 21 from purchasing a handgun from a federally licensed dealer (although federal law makes an exception for individuals between the ages of 18 and 20 to obtain one from a private dealer if state law permits.) 
As of July 1984, the National Minimum Drinking Age Act mandated that all states raise their respective drinking ages to 21 to create a uniform standard for legally purchasing, drinking, or publicly possessing alcohol with exceptions made for consumption only in private residences under parental supervision and permission. This was done in response to reducing the number of drunk driving fatalities prevalent among young drivers. States that choose not to comply can lose up to 10% of highway funding.
The Credit Card Act of 2009 imposed tougher safeguards for young adults between the ages of 18 and 20 obtaining a credit card. Young adults under the age of 21 must either have a co-signer 21 or older or show proof (usually a source of income) that they can repay their credit card balance. Unless that requirement is met, one must wait until 21 to be approved for a credit card on their own.
The Affordable Care Act of 2010 expands the age that young adults can remain on their parent's health insurance plan up to age 26.
As of December 2019, the federal government raised the legal age to purchase tobacco and vaping products from 18 to 21. In states where recreational marijuana is legalized, the default age is also 21, though those younger may be able to obtain medical marijuana prescriptions or cards upon seeing a physician.
Gambling also varies from 18 to 21 depending on the state and many rental car companies do not rent cars to those under 21 and have surcharges for drivers under 25 (although this is not codified, and is company policy).
In Quebec, Canada the Quebec legislature in 2020 raised the age one could purchase recreational marijuana from 18 to 21 stepping out of line with most of the country that set a minimum age of 19 (except Alberta, which is 18.) The Quebec government cited the risk that marijuana poses to the brain development of people under 21 as justification for the age raise.
In March 2021, the state of Washington in a 5–4 decision, justices in the Supreme Court of the State of Washington tossed the life without parole sentences of a 19-year-old and a 20-year-old convicted in separate cases of first-degree aggravated murder decades ago, saying, as with juveniles, the court must first consider the age of those under 21 before sentencing them to die behind bars. This comes at a time when there are ongoing debates about whether those between 18 and 20 should be exempted from the death penalty.
In Germany, courts largely sentence defendants under the age of 21 according to juvenile law in a bid to help them reintegrate into society and mete out punishments that fit the crime as well as the offender.
In May 2021, the state of Texas raised the age that one can be an exotic dancer and work and patronize sexually oriented businesses from 18 to 21.
In the UK, there have been many proposals to raise the age that one can buy tobacco from 18 to 21 in an attempt to curb teen and young adult use to get to a "smoke-free" UK by 2030.
All of these laws made over the years reflect the growing awareness that young adults, while not children, are still in a transitional stage between adolescence and full adulthood and that there should be policy adjustments or restrictions where necessary, especially where it pertains to activities that carry certain degrees of risk or harm to themselves or others.
At the same time, however, even though the generally accepted age of majority is 18 in most nations, there are rights or privileges afforded to adolescents who have not yet reached legal adulthood. In the United States, youth are able to get a part-time job at 14 provided they have a work permit. At 16, one is able to obtain a driver's permit or license depending on state laws and is able to work most jobs (except ones requiring heavy machinery) and consent to sexual activity (depending on the state). At 17, one is able to enlist in the armed forces with parental consent although they cannot be deployed to be in combat roles until age 18.
The voting age for local elections in most American cities is 18. But in five localities nationwide — four of which are in Maryland — 16 and 17-year-olds are eligible to vote. The cities are Takoma Park, Riverdale, Greenbelt, and Hyattsville.
In 2020, students 16 or older in Oakland, California gained the right to vote in school board elections. There is a growing movement to lower the voting age in the US and many other countries from 18 to 16 in hopes of engaging the youth vote and encouraging greater electoral participation. Some countries already have a voting age of 16 which include Austria, Scotland, Argentina, Brazil, Wales, Cuba, and Ecuador.
In Germany, one can purchase beer and wine at the age of 16 although they cannot purchase spirits or hard liquor until 18. The age of consent in Germany is 14 if both partners are under 18. Sexual activity with a person under 18 is punishable if the adult is a person of authority over the minor in upbringing, education, care, or employment.


== Social construction of adulthood ==
In contrast to biological perspectives of aging and adulthood, social scientists conceptualize adulthood as socially constructed. While aging is an established biological process, the attainment of adulthood is social in its criteria. In contrast to other perspectives that conceptualize aging and the attainment of adulthood as a largely universal development, regardless of context, nation, generation, gender, race, or social class. Social scientists regard these aspects as paramount in cultural definitions of adulthood.
Further evidence of adulthood as a social construction is illustrated by the changing criteria of adulthood over time. Historically, adulthood in the U.S. has rested on completing one's education, moving away from the family of origin, and beginning one's career. Other key historical criteria include entering a marriage and becoming a parent. These criteria are social and subjective; they are organized by gender, race, ethnicity, and social class, among other key identity markers. As a result, particular populations feel adult earlier in the life course than do others.
Contemporary experiences of and research on young adults today substitute more seemingly subjective criteria for adulthood which resonate more soundly with young adults' experiences of aging. The criteria are marked by a growing "importance of individualistic criteria and the irrelevance of the demographic markers of normative conceptions of adulthood." In particular, younger cohorts' attainment of adulthood centers on three criteria: gaining a sense of responsibility, independent decision-making, and financial independence.
Jeffrey Arnett, a psychologist and professor at Clark University in Massachusetts, studied the development of adults and argues that there is a new and distinct period of development in between adolescence and adulthood. This stage, which he calls "emerging adulthood", occurs between the ages of 18 and 25. Arnett describes these individuals as able to take some responsibility for their lives, but still not completely feeling like an adult. Arnett articulates five distinct features that are unique to this period of development: identity exploration, feeling in between, instability, self-focus, and having possibilities. Arnett makes it clear that these 5 aspects of emerging adulthood are only relevant during the life stage of emerging adulthood.
The first feature, identity exploration, describes emerging adults making decisions for themselves about their career, education, and love life. This is a time of life when a young person has yet to finalize these decisions but are pondering them, making them feel somewhere in between adolescent and adult. This leads into a second feature of this phase of life—feeling in between. Emerging adults feel that they are taking on responsibilities but do not feel like a 'full' adult quite yet. Next, the instability feature notes that emerging adults often move around after their high school years whether that is to college, friends' houses, or living with a romantic partner, as well as moving back home with their parents/guardians for a time. This moving around often ends once the individual's family and career have been set. Tagging along with the instability feature is having self-focus. Emerging adults, being away from their parental and societal routines, are now able to do what they want when they want and where they want before they are put back into a routine when they start a marriage, family, and career. Arnett's last feature of emerging adulthood, an age of possibilities, characterizes this stage as one where "optimism reigns". These individuals believe they have a good chance of turning out better than their parents did.


== Religion ==
According to Jewish tradition, adulthood is reached at age 13 for Jewish boys and 12 for Jewish girls in accordance with the Bar or Bat Mitzvah; they are expected to demonstrate preparation for adulthood by learning the Torah and other Jewish practices. The Christian Bible and Jewish scripture contain no age requirement for adulthood or marrying, which includes engaging in sexual activity.
The 1983 Code of Canon Law states, "A man before he has completed his sixteenth year of age, and likewise a woman before she has completed her fourteenth year of age, cannot enter a valid marriage". According to The Disappearance of Childhood by Neil Postman, the Christian Church of the Middle Ages considered the age of accountability, when a person could be tried and even executed as an adult, to be age 7. While certain religions have their guidelines on what it means to be an adult, generally speaking, there are trends that occur regarding religiosity as individuals transition from adolescence to adulthood. The role of religion in one's life can impact development during adolescence. The National Library of Medicine (NCBI) highlights some studies that show rates of religiosity declining as people move out of the house and live on their own. Oftentimes when people live on their own, they change their life goals and religion tends to be less important as they discover who they are. Other studies from the NCBI show that as adults get married and have children they settle down, and as they do, there tends to be an increase in religiosity. Everyone's level of religiosity builds at a different pace, meaning that religion relative to adult development varies across cultures and time.


== See also ==


== References ==.
A species (pl. species) is the basic unit of classification and a taxonomic rank of an organism, as well as a unit of biodiversity. It can be defined as the largest group of organisms in which any two individuals of the appropriate sexes or mating types can produce fertile offspring, typically by sexual reproduction. Other ways of defining species include their karyotype, DNA sequence, morphology, behaviour, or ecological niche. In addition, palaeontologists use the concept of the chronospecies since fossil reproduction cannot be examined. The most recent rigorous estimate for the total number of species of eukaryotes is between 8 and 8.7 million. About 14% of these had been described by 2011. All species (except viruses) are given a two-part name, a "binomen". The first part of a binomen is the name of a genus to which the species belongs. The second part is called the specific name or the specific epithet (in botanical nomenclature, also sometimes in zoological nomenclature). For example, Boa constrictor is one of the species of the genus Boa, with constrictor being the specific name.
While the definitions given above may seem adequate at first glance, when looked at more closely they represent problematic species concepts. For example, the boundaries between closely related species become unclear with hybridisation, in a species complex of hundreds of similar microspecies, and in a ring species. Also, among organisms that reproduce only asexually, the concept of a reproductive species breaks down, and each clonal lineage is potentially a microspecies. Although none of these are entirely satisfactory definitions, and while the concept of species may not be a perfect model of life, it is still a useful tool to scientists and conservationists for studying life on Earth, regardless of the theoretical difficulties. If species were fixed and distinct from one another, there would be no problem, but evolutionary processes cause species to change. This obliges taxonomists to decide, for example, when enough change has occurred to declare that a fossil lineage should be divided into multiple chronospecies, or when populations have diverged to have enough distinct character states to be described as cladistic species.
Species and higher taxa were seen from Aristotle until the 18th century as categories that could be arranged in a hierarchy, the great chain of being. In the 19th century, biologists grasped that species could evolve given sufficient time. Charles Darwin's 1859 book On the Origin of Species explained how species could arise by natural selection. That understanding was greatly extended in the 20th century through genetics and population ecology. Genetic variability arises from mutations and recombination, while organisms are mobile, leading to geographical isolation and genetic drift with varying selection pressures. Genes can sometimes be exchanged between species by horizontal gene transfer; new species can arise rapidly through hybridisation and polyploidy; and species may become extinct for a variety of reasons. Viruses are a special case, driven by a balance of mutation and selection, and can be treated as quasispecies.


== Definition ==
Biologists and taxonomists have made many attempts to define species, beginning from morphology and moving towards genetics. Early taxonomists such as Linnaeus had no option but to describe what they saw: this was later formalised as the typological or morphological species concept. Ernst Mayr emphasised reproductive isolation, but this, like other species concepts, can be hard or even impossible to test for groups of organisms separated in space or time. Later biologists have tried to refine Mayr's definition with the recognition and cohesion concepts, among others. Many of the concepts are quite similar or overlap, so they are not easy to count: the biologist R. L. Mayden recorded about 24 concepts, and the philosopher of science John Wilkins counted 26. Wilkins further grouped the species concepts into seven basic kinds of concepts: (1) agamospecies for asexual organisms (2) biospecies for reproductively isolated sexual organisms (3) ecospecies based on ecological niches (4) evolutionary species based on lineage (5) genetic species based on gene pool (6) morphospecies based on form or phenotype and (7) taxonomic species, a species as determined by a taxonomist.


=== Typological or morphological species ===

A typological species is a group of organisms in which individuals conform to certain fixed properties (a type, which may be defined by a chosen 'nominal species'), so that even pre-literate people often recognise the same taxon as do modern taxonomists. Modern-day field guides and identification websites such as iNaturalist use this concept. The clusters of variations or phenotypes within specimens (such as longer or shorter tails) would differentiate the species. This method was used as a "classical" method of determining species, such as with Linnaeus, early in evolutionary theory. However, different phenotypes are not necessarily different species (e.g. a four-winged Drosophila born to a two-winged mother is not a different species). Species named in this manner are called morphospecies.
In the 1970s, Robert R. Sokal, Theodore J. Crovello and Peter Sneath proposed a variation on the morphological species concept, a phenetic species, defined as a set of organisms with a similar phenotype to each other, but a different phenotype from other sets of organisms. It differs from the morphological species concept in including a numerical measure of distance or similarity to cluster entities based on multivariate comparisons of a reasonably large number of phenotypic traits.


=== Recognition and cohesion species ===
A mate-recognition species is a group of sexually reproducing organisms that recognise one another as potential mates. Expanding on this to allow for post-mating isolation, a cohesion species is the most inclusive population of individuals having the potential for phenotypic cohesion through intrinsic cohesion mechanisms; no matter whether populations can hybridise successfully, they are still distinct cohesion species if the amount of hybridisation is insufficient to completely mix their respective gene pools. A further development of the recognition concept is provided by the biosemiotic concept of species.


=== Genetic similarity and barcode species ===


==== Single locus (barcoding) ====
In microbiology, genes can move freely even between distantly related bacteria, possibly extending to the whole bacterial domain. As a rule of thumb, microbiologists had assumed that members of Bacteria or Archaea with 16S ribosomal RNA gene sequences more similar than 97% to each other need to be checked by DNA–DNA hybridisation to decide if they belong to the same species. This concept was narrowed in 2006 to a similarity of 98.7%.
The 16S sequence is an example of a single locus which is simple enough for non-specialists to apply and, in most cases, sufficient to distinguish species. Using a single easy-to-use locus to distinguish taxa is called DNA barcoding. One of the barcodes for eukaryotes is a region of mitochondrial DNA within the gene for cytochrome c oxidase. A database, Barcode of Life Data System, contains DNA barcode sequences from over 190,000 species. However, scientists such as Rob DeSalle have expressed concern that classical taxonomy and DNA barcoding, which they consider a misnomer, need to be reconciled, as they delimit species differently. Genetic introgression mediated by endosymbionts and other vectors can further make barcodes ineffective in the identification of species.
A singular locus can be a good proxy of time of divergence assuming the chosen locus evolved like most of the rest of the genome. This assumption can be broken by horizontal gene transfer affecting the locus itself. Rapid modes of evolution separating biological species (speciation) over a short timespan would also decouple the species concept from time itself. Among bacteria, there are several cases where very different genomes share 99.9% 16S identity.


==== Multilocus comparison ====
Using multiple (usually fewer than 10) loci for comparison provides more phylogenetic signal compared to comparing versions of the same loci as more mutations can be captured. As a result, it provides improved taxonomic resolution compared to single-locus comparison, giving results more similar to the expensive "gold standard" of whole genome comparison at a small increase in cost.
Even when whole genomes are available, there are good reasons to only compare select genes: many genes are not universally found in all genomes, so they provide limited taxonomic signal while still adding to the computational cost of comparison. In situations like this, tens to hundreds of loci may be extracted from each genome and used together. As with comparisons with fewer loci, marker genes used for this purpose should be genes with low rates of horizontal transfer and gene duplication, few known instances of horizontal transfer, and high occurrence in the sampled genomes. With prokaryotes, marker genes can be used to delimit taxa down to the genus level, with whole-genome comparison reserved to separate species from each other.


==== Whole genome comparison ====
The surefire way to capture all gene flow among populations is to compare their entire genomes. The average nucleotide identity (ANI) method quantifies genetic distance between entire genomes, using regions of about 10,000 base pairs. With enough data from genomes of one genus, algorithms can be used to categorize species, as for Pseudomonas avellanae in 2013, and for all sequenced bacteria and archaea since 2020. Observed ANI values among prokaryotic sequences appear to have an "ANI gap" at 85–95%, suggesting that a genetic boundary suitable for defining a species concept is present.


=== Phylogenetic or cladistic species ===

A phylogenetic or cladistic species is "the smallest aggregation of populations (sexual) or lineages (asexual) diagnosable by a unique combination of character states in comparable individuals (semaphoronts)". The empirical basis – observed character states – provides the evidence to support hypotheses about evolutionarily divergent lineages that have maintained their hereditary integrity through time and space. Molecular markers may be used to determine diagnostic genetic differences in the nuclear or mitochondrial DNA of various species. For example, in a study done on fungi, studying the nucleotide characters using cladistic species produced the most accurate results in recognising the numerous fungi species of all the concepts studied. Versions of the phylogenetic species concept that emphasise monophyly or diagnosability may lead to splitting of existing species, for example in Bovidae, by recognising old subspecies as species, despite the fact that there are no reproductive barriers, and populations may intergrade morphologically. Others have called this approach taxonomic inflation, diluting the species concept and making taxonomy unstable. Yet others defend this approach, considering "taxonomic inflation" pejorative and labelling the opposing view as "taxonomic conservatism"; claiming it is politically expedient to split species and recognise smaller populations at the species level, because this means they can more easily be included as endangered in the IUCN red list and can attract conservation legislation and funding.
Unlike the biological species concept, a cladistic species does not rely on reproductive isolation – its criteria are independent of processes that are integral in other concepts. Therefore, it applies to asexual lineages. However, it does not always provide clear cut and intuitively satisfying boundaries between taxa, and may require multiple sources of evidence, such as more than one polymorphic locus, to give plausible results.


=== Evolutionary species ===
An evolutionary species, suggested by George Gaylord Simpson in 1951, is "an entity composed of organisms which maintains its identity from other such entities through time and over space, and which has its own independent evolutionary fate and historical tendencies". This differs from the biological species concept in embodying persistence over time. Wiley and Mayden stated that they see the evolutionary species concept as "identical" to Willi Hennig's species-as-lineages concept, and asserted that the biological species concept, "the several versions" of the phylogenetic species concept, and the idea that species are of the same kind as higher taxa are not suitable for biodiversity studies (with the intention of estimating the number of species accurately). They further suggested that the concept works for both asexual and sexually-reproducing species. A version of the concept is Kevin de Queiroz's "General Lineage Concept of Species".


=== Ecological species ===
An ecological species is a set of organisms adapted to a particular set of resources, called a niche, in the environment. According to this concept, populations form the discrete phenetic clusters that we recognise as species because the ecological and evolutionary processes controlling how resources are divided up tend to produce those clusters.


=== Genetic species ===
A genetic species as defined by Robert Baker and Robert Bradley is a set of genetically isolated interbreeding populations. This is similar to Mayr's Biological Species Concept, but stresses genetic rather than reproductive isolation. In the 21st century, a genetic species could be established by comparing DNA sequences. Earlier, other methods were available, such as comparing karyotypes (sets of chromosomes) and allozymes (enzyme variants).


=== Evolutionarily significant unit ===
An evolutionarily significant unit (ESU) or "wildlife species" is a population of organisms considered distinct for purposes of conservation.


=== Chronospecies ===

In palaeontology, with only comparative anatomy (morphology) and histology from fossils as evidence, the concept of a chronospecies can be applied. During anagenesis (evolution, not necessarily involving branching), some palaeontologists seek to identify a sequence of species, each one derived from the phyletically extinct one before through continuous, slow and more or less uniform change. In such a time sequence, some palaeontologists assess how much change is required for a morphologically distinct form to be considered a different species from its ancestors.


=== Viral quasispecies ===

Viruses have enormous populations, are doubtfully living since they consist of little more than a string of DNA or RNA in a protein coat, and mutate rapidly. All of these factors make conventional species concepts largely inapplicable. A viral quasispecies is a group of genotypes related by similar mutations, competing within a highly mutagenic environment, and hence governed by a mutation–selection balance. It is predicted that a viral quasispecies at a low but evolutionarily neutral and highly connected (that is, flat) region in the fitness landscape will outcompete a quasispecies located at a higher but narrower fitness peak in which the surrounding mutants are unfit, "the quasispecies effect" or the "survival of the flattest". There is no suggestion that a viral quasispecies resembles a traditional biological species. The International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses has since 1962 developed a universal taxonomic scheme for viruses; this has stabilised viral taxonomy.


=== Mayr's biological species concept ===

Most modern textbooks make use of Ernst Mayr's 1942 definition, known as the biological species concept, as a basis for further discussion on the definition of species. It is also called a reproductive or isolation concept. This defines a species as

groups of actually or potentially interbreeding natural populations, which are reproductively isolated from other such groups.
It has been argued that this definition is a natural consequence of the effect of sexual reproduction on the dynamics of natural selection. Mayr's use of the adjective "potentially" has been a point of debate; some interpretations exclude unusual or artificial matings that occur only in captivity, or that involve animals capable of mating but that do not normally do so in the wild.


== The species problem ==
It is difficult to define a species in a way that applies to all organisms. This debate about species concepts is called the species problem. The problem was recognised even in 1859, when Darwin wrote in On the Origin of Species:

I was much struck how entirely vague and arbitrary is the distinction between species and varieties.
He went on to write:

No one definition has satisfied all naturalists; yet every naturalist knows vaguely what he means when he speaks of a species. Generally the term includes the unknown element of a distinct act of creation.


=== Problems with simple definitions of species ===

Many authors have argued that a simple textbook definition, following Mayr's concept, works well for most multi-celled organisms, but breaks down in several situations:

When organisms reproduce asexually, as in single-celled organisms such as bacteria and other prokaryotes, and parthenogenetic or apomictic multi-celled organisms. DNA barcoding and phylogenetics are commonly used in these cases. The term quasispecies is sometimes used for rapidly mutating entities like viruses.
When scientists do not know whether two morphologically similar groups of organisms are capable of interbreeding; this is the case with all extinct life-forms in palaeontology, as breeding experiments are not possible.
When hybridisation permits substantial gene flow between species.
In ring species, when members of adjacent populations in a widely continuous distribution range interbreed successfully but members of more distant populations do not.

Species identification is made difficult by discordance between molecular and morphological investigations; these can be categorised as two types: (i) one morphology, multiple lineages (e.g. morphological convergence, cryptic species) and (ii) one lineage, multiple morphologies (e.g. phenotypic plasticity, multiple life-cycle stages). In addition, horizontal gene transfer (HGT) makes it difficult to define a species. All species definitions assume that an organism acquires its genes from one or two parents very like the "daughter" organism, but that is not what happens in HGT. There is strong evidence of HGT between very dissimilar groups of prokaryotes, and at least occasionally between dissimilar groups of eukaryotes, including some crustaceans and echinoderms.
The evolutionary biologist James Mallet concludes that

there is no easy way to tell whether related geographic or temporal forms belong to the same or different species. Species gaps can be verified only locally and at a point of time. One is forced to admit that Darwin's insight is correct: any local reality or integrity of species is greatly reduced over large geographic ranges and time periods.
The botanist Brent Mishler argued that the species concept is not valid, notably because gene flux decreases gradually rather than in discrete steps, which hampers objective delimitation of species. Indeed, complex and unstable patterns of gene flux have been observed in cichlid teleosts of the East African Great Lakes. Wilkins argued that "if we were being true to evolution and the consequent phylogenetic approach to taxa, we should replace it with a 'smallest clade' idea" (a phylogenetic species concept). Mishler and Wilkins and others concur with this approach, even though this would raise difficulties in biological nomenclature. Wilkins cited the ichthyologist Charles Tate Regan's early 20th century remark that "a species is whatever a suitably qualified biologist chooses to call a species". Wilkins noted that the philosopher Philip Kitcher called this the "cynical species concept", and arguing that far from being cynical, it usefully leads to an empirical taxonomy for any given group, based on taxonomists' experience. Other biologists have gone further and argued that we should abandon species entirely, and refer to the "Least Inclusive Taxonomic Units" (LITUs), a view that would be coherent with current evolutionary theory.


=== Aggregates of microspecies ===

The species concept is further weakened by the existence of microspecies, groups of organisms, including many plants, with very little genetic variability, usually forming species aggregates. For example, the dandelion Taraxacum officinale and the blackberry Rubus fruticosus are aggregates with many microspecies—perhaps 400 in the case of the blackberry and over 200 in the dandelion in Britain alone, complicated by hybridisation, apomixis and polyploidy, making gene flow between populations difficult to determine, and their taxonomy debatable. Species complexes occur in insects such as Heliconius butterflies, vertebrates such as Hypsiboas treefrogs, and fungi such as the fly agaric.


=== Hybridisation ===

Natural hybridisation presents a challenge to the concept of a reproductively isolated species, as fertile hybrids permit gene flow between two populations. For example, the carrion crow Corvus corone and the hooded crow Corvus cornix appear and are classified as separate species, yet they can hybridise where their geographical ranges overlap.


=== Ring species ===

A ring species is a connected series of neighbouring populations, each of which can sexually interbreed with adjacent related populations, but for which there exist at least two "end" populations in the series, which are too distantly related to interbreed, though there is a potential gene flow between each "linked" population. Such non-breeding, though genetically connected, "end" populations may co-exist in the same region thus closing the ring. Ring species thus present a difficulty for any species concept that relies on reproductive isolation. However, ring species are at best rare. Proposed examples include the herring gull–lesser black-backed gull complex around the North pole, the Ensatina eschscholtzii group of 19 populations of salamanders in America, and the greenish warbler in Asia, but many so-called ring species have turned out to be the result of misclassification leading to questions on whether there really are any ring species.


== Taxonomy and naming ==


=== Common and scientific names ===
The commonly used names for kinds of organisms are often ambiguous: "cat" could mean the domestic cat, Felis catus, or the cat family, Felidae. Another problem with common names is that they often vary from place to place, so that puma, cougar, catamount, panther, painter and mountain lion all mean Puma concolor in various parts of America, while "panther" may also mean the jaguar (Panthera onca) of Latin America or the leopard (Panthera pardus) of Africa and Asia. In contrast, the scientific names of species are chosen to be unique and universal (except for some inter-code homonyms); they are in two parts used together: the genus as in Puma, and the specific epithet as in concolor.


=== Species description ===

A species is given a taxonomic name when a type specimen is described formally, in a publication that assigns it a unique scientific name. The description typically provides means for identifying the new species, which may not be based solely on morphology (see cryptic species), differentiating it from other previously described and related or confusable species and provides a validly published name (in botany) or an available name (in zoology) when the paper is accepted for publication. The type material is usually held in a permanent repository, often the research collection of a major museum or university, that allows independent verification and the means to compare specimens. Describers of new species are asked to choose names that, in the words of the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature, are "appropriate, compact, euphonious, memorable, and do not cause offence".


=== Abbreviations ===

Books and articles sometimes intentionally do not identify species fully, using the abbreviation "sp." in the singular or "spp." (standing for species pluralis, Latin for "multiple species") in the plural in place of the specific name or epithet (e.g. "Canis sp."). This commonly occurs when authors are confident that some individuals belong to a particular genus but are not sure to which exact species they belong, as is common in paleontology.
Authors may also use "spp." as a short way of saying that something applies to many species within a genus, but not to all. If scientists mean that something applies to all species within a genus, they use the genus name without the specific name or epithet. The names of genera and species are usually printed in italics. However, abbreviations such as "sp." should not be italicised.
When a species' identity is not clear, a specialist may use "cf." before the epithet to indicate that confirmation is required. The abbreviations "nr." (near) or "aff." (affine) may be used when the identity is unclear but when the species appears to be similar to the species mentioned after.


=== Identification codes ===
With the rise of online databases, codes have been devised to provide identifiers for species that are already defined, including:

National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) employs a numeric 'taxid' or Taxonomy identifier, a "stable unique identifier", e.g., the taxid of Homo sapiens is 9606.
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) employs a three- or four-letter code for a limited number of organisms; in this code, for example, H. sapiens is simply hsa.
UniProt employs an "organism mnemonic" of not more than five alphanumeric characters, e.g., HUMAN for H. sapiens.
Integrated Taxonomic Information System (ITIS) provides a unique number for each species. The LSID for Homo sapiens is urn:lsid:catalogueoflife.org:taxon:4da6736d-d35f-11e6-9d3f-bc764e092680:col20170225.


=== Lumping and splitting ===

The naming of a particular species, including which genus (and higher taxa) it is placed in, is a hypothesis about the evolutionary relationships and distinguishability of that group of organisms. As further information comes to hand, the hypothesis may be corroborated or refuted. Sometimes, especially in the past when communication was more difficult, taxonomists working in isolation have given two distinct names to individual organisms later identified as the same species. When two species names are discovered to apply to the same species, the older species name is given priority and usually retained, and the newer name considered as a junior synonym, a process called synonymy. Dividing a taxon into multiple, often new, taxa is called splitting. Taxonomists are often referred to as "lumpers" or "splitters" by their colleagues, depending on their personal approach to recognising differences or commonalities between organisms. The circumscription of taxa, considered a taxonomic decision at the discretion of cognizant specialists, is not governed by the Codes of Zoological or Botanical Nomenclature, in contrast to the PhyloCode, and contrary to what is done in several other fields, in which the definitions of technical terms, like geochronological units and geopolitical entities, are explicitly delimited.


=== Broad and narrow senses ===

The nomenclatural codes that guide the naming of species, including the ICZN for animals and the ICN for plants, do not make rules for defining the boundaries of the species. Research can change the boundaries, also known as circumscription, based on new evidence. Species may then need to be distinguished by the boundary definitions used, and in such cases the names may be qualified with sensu stricto ("in the narrow sense") to denote usage in the exact meaning given by an author such as the person who named the species, while the antonym sensu lato ("in the broad sense") denotes a wider usage, for instance including other subspecies. Other abbreviations such as "auct." ("author"), and qualifiers such as "non" ("not") may be used to further clarify the sense in which the specified authors delineated or described the species.


== Change ==
Species are subject to change, whether by evolving into new species, exchanging genes with other species, merging with other species or by becoming extinct.


=== Speciation ===

The evolutionary process by which biological populations of sexually-reproducing organisms evolve to become distinct or reproductively isolated as species is called speciation. Charles Darwin was the first to describe the role of natural selection in speciation in his 1859 book The Origin of Species. Speciation depends on a measure of reproductive isolation, a reduced gene flow. This occurs most easily in allopatric speciation, where populations are separated geographically and can diverge gradually as mutations accumulate. Reproductive isolation is threatened by hybridisation, but this can be selected against once a pair of populations have incompatible alleles of the same gene, as described in the Bateson–Dobzhansky–Muller model. A different mechanism, phyletic speciation, involves one lineage gradually changing over time into a new and distinct form (a chronospecies), without increasing the number of resultant species.


=== Exchange of genes between species ===

Horizontal gene transfer between organisms of different species, either through hybridisation, antigenic shift, or reassortment, is sometimes an important source of genetic variation. Viruses can transfer genes between species. Bacteria can exchange plasmids with bacteria of other species, including some apparently distantly related ones in different phylogenetic domains, making analysis of their relationships difficult, and weakening the concept of a bacterial species.
Louis-Marie Bobay and Howard Ochman suggest, based on analysis of the genomes of many types of bacteria, that they can often be grouped "into communities that regularly swap genes", in much the same way that plants and animals can be grouped into reproductively isolated breeding populations. Bacteria may thus form species, analogous to Mayr's biological species concept, consisting of asexually reproducing populations that exchange genes by homologous recombination.


=== Extinction ===

A species is extinct when the last individual of that species dies, but it may be functionally extinct well before that moment. It is estimated that over 99 percent of all species that ever lived on Earth, some five billion species, are now extinct. Some of these were in mass extinctions such as those at the ends of the Ordovician, Devonian, Permian, Triassic and Cretaceous periods. Mass extinctions had a variety of causes including volcanic activity, climate change, and changes in oceanic and atmospheric chemistry, and they in turn had major effects on Earth's ecology, atmosphere, land surface and waters. Another form of extinction is through the assimilation of one species by another through hybridization. The resulting single species has been termed as a "compilospecies".


== Practical implications ==
Biologists and conservationists need to categorise and identify organisms in the course of their work. Difficulty assigning organisms reliably to a species constitutes a threat to the validity of research results, for example making measurements of how abundant a species is in an ecosystem moot. Surveys using a phylogenetic species concept reported 48% more species and accordingly smaller populations and ranges than those using nonphylogenetic concepts; this was termed "taxonomic inflation", which could cause a false appearance of change to the number of endangered species and consequent political and practical difficulties. Some observers claim that there is an inherent conflict between the desire to understand the processes of speciation and the need to identify and to categorise.
Conservation laws in many countries make special provisions to prevent species from going extinct. Hybridization zones between two species, one that is protected and one that is not, have sometimes led to conflicts between lawmakers, land owners and conservationists. One of the classic cases in North America is that of the protected northern spotted owl which hybridises with the unprotected California spotted owl and the barred owl; this has led to legal debates.
It has been argued, that since species are not comparable, simply counting them is not a valid measure of biodiversity; alternative measures of phylogenetic biodiversity have been proposed.


== History ==


=== Classical forms ===

In his biology, Aristotle used the term γένος (génos) to mean a kind, such as a bird or fish, and εἶδος (eidos) to mean a specific form within a kind, such as (within the birds) the crane, eagle, crow, or sparrow. These terms were translated into Latin as "genus" and "species", though they do not correspond to the Linnean terms thus named; today the birds are a class, the cranes are a family, and the crows a genus. A kind was distinguished by its attributes; for instance, a bird has feathers, a beak, wings, a hard-shelled egg, and warm blood. A form was distinguished by being shared by all its members, the young inheriting any variations they might have from their parents. Aristotle believed all kinds and forms to be distinct and unchanging. More importantly, in Aristotle's works, the terms γένος (génos) and εἶδος (eidos) are relative; a taxon that is considered an eidos in a given context can be considered a génos in another, and be further subdivided into eide (plural of eidos). His approach remained influential until the Renaissance, and still, to a lower extent, today.


=== Fixed species ===

When observers in the Early Modern period began to develop systems of organization for living things, they placed each kind of animal or plant into a context. Many of these early delineation schemes would now be considered whimsical: schemes included consanguinity based on colour (all plants with yellow flowers) or behaviour (snakes, scorpions and certain biting ants). John Ray, an English naturalist, was the first to attempt a biological definition of species in 1686, as follows:

No surer criterion for determining species has occurred to me than the distinguishing features that perpetuate themselves in propagation from seed. Thus, no matter what variations occur in the individuals or the species, if they spring from the seed of one and the same plant, they are accidental variations and not such as to distinguish a species ... Animals likewise that differ specifically preserve their distinct species permanently; one species never springs from the seed of another nor vice versa.
In the 18th century, the Swedish scientist Carl Linnaeus classified organisms according to shared physical characteristics, and not simply based upon differences. Like many contemporary systematists, he established the idea of a taxonomic hierarchy of classification based upon observable characteristics and intended to reflect natural relationships. At the time, however, it was still widely believed that there was no organic connection between species (except, possibly, between those of a given genus), no matter how similar they appeared. This view was influenced by European scholarly and religious education, which held that the taxa had been created by God, forming an Aristotelian hierarchy, the scala naturae or great chain of being. However, whether or not it was supposed to be fixed, the scala (a ladder) inherently implied the possibility of climbing.


=== Mutability ===
In viewing evidence of hybridisation, Linnaeus recognised that species were not fixed and could change; he did not consider that new species could emerge and maintained a view of divinely fixed species that may alter through processes of hybridisation or acclimatisation. By the 19th century, naturalists understood that species could change form over time, and that the history of the planet provided enough time for major changes. Jean-Baptiste Lamarck, in his 1809 Zoological Philosophy, described the transmutation of species, proposing that a species could change over time, in a radical departure from Aristotelian thinking.
In 1858, Charles Darwin and Alfred Russel Wallace provided a compelling account of evolution and the formation of new species. Darwin argued that it was populations that evolved, not individuals, by natural selection from naturally occurring variation among individuals. This required a new definition of species. Darwin concluded that species are what they appear to be: ideas, provisionally useful for naming groups of interacting individuals, writing:

I look at the term species as one arbitrarily given for the sake of convenience to a set of individuals closely resembling each other ... It does not essentially differ from the word variety, which is given to less distinct and more fluctuating forms. The term variety, again, in comparison with mere individual differences, is also applied arbitrarily, and for convenience sake.


== See also ==


== References ==


== Sources ==


== External links ==

Wikispecies – The free species directory that anyone can edit from the Wikimedia Foundation
Barcoding of species
Catalogue of Life
European Species Names in Linnaean, Czech, English, German and French
"Species" entry at the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
VisualTaxa.
The FDA animal efficacy rule (also known as animal rule) applies to development and testing of drugs and biologicals to reduce or prevent serious or life-threatening conditions caused by exposure to lethal or permanently disabling toxic agents (chemical, biological, radiological, or nuclear substances), where human efficacy trials are not feasible or ethical. The animal efficacy rule was finalized by the FDA and authorized by the United States Congress in 2002, following the September 11 attacks and concerns regarding bioterrorism.


== Summary ==
The FDA can rely on evidence from animal studies to provide substantial evidence of product effectiveness if:

There is a reasonably well-understood mechanism for the toxicity of the agent and its amelioration or prevention by the product;
The effect is demonstrated in either:
More than one animal species expected to react with a response predictive for humans; or
One well-characterized animal species model (adequately evaluated for its responsiveness in humans) for predicting the response in humans.
The animal study endpoint is clearly related to the desired benefit in humans; and
Data or information on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of the product or other relevant data or information in animals or humans is sufficiently well understood to allow selection of an effective dose in humans, and it is, therefore, reasonable to expect the effectiveness of the product in animals to be a reliable indicator of its effectiveness in humans.
FDA published a Guidance for Industry on the Animal Rule in October 2015.


== References ==


== External links ==
21 CFR Parts 314 and 601, Docket No. 98N-0237 New Drug and Biological Drug Products; Evidence Needed to Demonstrate Effectiveness of New Drugs When Human Efficacy Studies Are Not Ethical or Feasible.
What is meant by "Required Under Animal Efficacy Rule" in the search results display? FDA.gov Postmarketing Requirements and Commitments: Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ).
A species description is a formal scientific description of a newly encountered species, typically articulated through a scientific publication. Its purpose is to provide a clear description of a new species of organism and explain how it differs from species that have been previously described or related species. For a species to be considered valid, a species description must follow established guidelines and naming conventions dictated by relevant nomenclature codes. These include the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature (ICZN) for animals, the International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants (ICN) for plants, and the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV) for viruses. A species description often includes photographs or other illustrations of type material and information regarding where this material is deposited. The publication in which the species is described gives the new species a formal scientific name. Some 1.9 million species have been identified and described, out of some 8.7 million that may actually exist. Additionally, over five billion species have gone extinct over the history of life on Earth.


== Naming process ==

A name of a new species becomes valid (available in zoological terminology) with the date of publication of its formal scientific description. Once the scientist has performed the necessary research to determine that the discovered organism represents a new species, the scientific results are summarized in a scientific manuscript, either as part of a book or as a paper to be submitted to a scientific journal.
A scientific species description must fulfill several formal criteria specified by the nomenclature codes, e.g. selection of at least one type specimen. These criteria are intended to ensure that the species name is clear and unambiguous, for example, the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature states that "Authors should exercise reasonable care and consideration in forming new names to ensure that they are chosen with their subsequent users in mind and that, as far as possible, they are appropriate, compact, euphonious, memorable, and do not cause offence."
Species names are written in the 26 letters of the Latin alphabet, but many species names are based on words from other languages, and are Latinized.
Once the manuscript has been accepted for publication, the new species name is officially created.
Once a species name has been assigned and approved, it can generally not be changed except in the case of error.  For example, a species of beetle (Anophthalmus hitleri) was named by a German collector after Adolf Hitler in 1933 when he had recently become chancellor of Germany.  It is not clear whether such a dedication would be considered acceptable or appropriate today, but the name remains in use.
Species names have been chosen on many different bases. The most common is a naming for the species' external appearance, its origin, or the species name is a dedication to a certain person.  Examples would include a bat species named for the two stripes on its back (Saccopteryx bilineata), a frog named for its Bolivian origin (Phyllomedusa boliviana), and an ant species dedicated to the actor Harrison Ford (Pheidole harrisonfordi). A scientific name in honor of a person or persons is known as a taxonomic eponym or eponymic; patronym and matronym are the gendered terms for this.
A number of humorous species names also exist.  Literary examples include the genus name Borogovia (an extinct dinosaur), which is named after the borogove, a mythical character from Lewis Carroll's poem "Jabberwocky".  A second example, Macrocarpaea apparata (a tall plant) was named after the magical spell "to apparate" from the Harry Potter novels by J. K. Rowling, as it seemed to appear out of nowhere. In 1975, the British naturalist Sir Peter Scott proposed the binomial name Nessiteras rhombopteryx ("Ness monster with diamond-shaped fin") for the Loch Ness Monster; it was soon spotted that it was an anagram of "monster hoax by Sir Peter S".


=== Recognizing benefactors through species naming ===

Species have frequently been named by scientists in recognition of supporters and benefactors.  For example, the genus Victoria (a flowering waterplant) was named in honour of Queen Victoria of Great Britain.  More recently, a species of lemur (Avahi cleesei) was named after the actor John Cleese in recognition of his work to publicize the plight of lemurs in Madagascar.
Non-profit ecological organizations may also allow benefactors to name new species in exchange for financial support for taxonomic research and nature conservation. A German non-profit organisation, BIOPAT – Patrons for Biodiversity, has raised more than $450,000 for research and conservation through sponsorship of over 100 species using this model. An individual example of this system is the Plecturocebus aureipalatii (or "monkey of the Golden Palace"), which was named after the Golden Palace casino in recognition of a $650,000 contribution to the Madidi National Park in Bolivia in 2005.
The International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants discourages this practice somewhat: "Recommendation 20A. Authors forming generic names should comply with the following ... (h) Not dedicate genera to persons quite unconcerned with botany, mycology, phycology, or natural science in general."


== History ==

Early biologists often published entire volumes or multiple-volume works of descriptions in an attempt to catalog all known species. These catalogs typically featured extensive descriptions of each species and were often illustrated upon reprinting.
The first of these large catalogs was Aristotle's History of Animals, published around 343 BC. Aristotle included descriptions of creatures, mostly fish and invertebrates, in his homeland, and several mythological creatures rumored to live in far-away lands, such as the manticore.
In 77 AD Pliny the Elder dedicated several volumes of his Natural History to the description of all life forms he knew to exist.  He appears to have read Aristotle's work since he writes about many of the same far-away mythological creatures.
Toward the end of the 12th century, Konungs skuggsjá, an Old Norse philosophical didactic work, featured several descriptions of the whales, seals, and monsters of the Icelandic seas. These descriptions were brief and often erroneous, and they included a description of the mermaid and a rare island-like sea monster called hafgufu. The author was hesitant to mention the beast (known today to be fictitious) for fear of its size, but felt it was important enough to be included in his descriptions.
However, the earliest recognized species authority is Carl Linnaeus, who standardized the modern taxonomy system beginning with his Systema Naturae in 1735.
As the catalog of known species was increasing rapidly, it became impractical to maintain a single work documenting every species.  Publishing a paper documenting a single species was much faster and could be done by scientists with less broadened scopes of study.  For example, a scientist who discovered a new species of insect would not need to understand plants, or frogs, or even insects which did not resemble the species, but would only need to understand closely related insects.


== Modern differences ==
Formal species descriptions today follow strict guidelines set forth by the codes of nomenclature. Very detailed formal descriptions are made by scientists, who usually study the organism closely for a considerable time. A diagnosis may be used instead of, or as well as the description. A diagnosis specifies the distinction between the new species and other species, and it does not necessarily have to be based on morphology.
In recent times, new species descriptions have been made without voucher specimens, and this has been controversial.


== Statistics ==
According to the RetroSOS report, the following numbers of species have been described each year in the 2000s.


== See also ==
Binomial nomenclature
Biological type
Botanical Latin
Glossary of scientific naming
Taxonomic treatment
Undescribed taxon
Category:Species described in the 21st century, with subcategories; contains links to earlier centuries


== References ==


== Bibliography ==
McNeill, J.; Barrie, F.R.; Buck, W.R.; Demoulin, V.; Greuter, W.; Hawksworth, D.L.; Herendeen, P.S.; Knapp, S.; Marhold, K.; Prado, J.; Prud'homme Van Reine, W.F.; Smith, G.F.; Wiersema, J.H.; Turland, N.J. (2012). International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants (Melbourne Code) adopted by the Eighteenth International Botanical Congress Melbourne, Australia, July 2011. Vol. Regnum Vegetabile 154. A.R.G. Gantner Verlag KG. ISBN 978-3-87429-425-6.


== Other sources ==
Winston, Judith E. 1999. Describing Species: Practical Taxonomic Procedure For Biologists. Columbia University Press. ISBN 0-231-06824-7


== External links ==
 Works related to descriptions of new species at Wikisource.
Advanced Placement (AP) Biology (also known as AP Bio) is an Advanced Placement biology course and exam offered by the College Board in the United States. For the 2012–2013 school year, the College Board unveiled a new curriculum with a greater focus on "scientific practices".
This course is designed for students who wish to pursue an interest in the life sciences. The College Board recommends successful completion of high school biology and high school chemistry before commencing AP Biology, although the actual prerequisites vary from school to school and from state to state. 


== Topic outline ==
The exam covers the following 8 units. The percentage indicates the portion of the multiple-choice section of the exam focused on each content area:

The course is based on and tests six skills, called scientific practices which include:

In addition to the topics above, students are required to be familiar with general lab procedure. Students should know how to collect data, analyze data to form conclusions, and apply those conclusions.


== Exam ==
Students are allowed to use a four-function, scientific, or graphing calculator.
The exam has two sections: a 90 minute multiple choice section and a 90 minute free response section. There are 60 multiple choice questions and six free responses, two long and four short. Both sections are worth 50% of the score.


=== Score distribution ===


== Commonly used textbooks ==
Biology, AP Edition by Sylvia Mader (2012, hardcover ISBN 0076620042)
Life: The Science of Biology (Sadava, Heller, Bilal, Purves, and Hillis, ISBN 978-0-7167-7671-0)
Campbell Biology AP Ninth Edition (Reece, Urry, Cain, Wasserman, Minorsky, and Andrew Jackson ISBN 978-0131375048)


== See also ==
Glossary of biology
A.P Bio (TV Show)


== References ==


== External links ==
AP Biology at CollegeBoard.com
AP Biology Teacher Community at CollegeBoard.org.
The UC Irvine Charlie Dunlop School of Biological Sciences (formerly the School of Biological Sciences) at the University of California, Irvine (UCI or UC Irvine) is one of the largest academic units at UCI devoted to research and education in the life sciences. The school was renamed in 2024 in recognition of a $50 million philanthropic gift from biotechnology entrepreneur Charlie Dunlop, founder of Ambry Genetics. 
The Dunlop School emphasizes an interdisciplinary approach across four departments — Developmental & Cell Biology, Ecology & Evolutionary Biology, Molecular Biology & Biochemistry, and Neurobiology & Behavior — unified by the school’s core philosophy of “Mind | Body | World."
It is home to more than 4,000 undergraduate majors, 300 graduate students, and over 120 faculty members, conducting research in neuroscience, environmental science, molecular biology, developmental biology and related disciplines. It is ranked No. 32 in U.S. News & World Report’s list of best graduate schools.


== History ==
The school was established in 1965, making it one of UCI’s original academic units. It initially consisted of four departments — Molecular & Cell Biology, Organismic Biology, Psychobiology, and Population & Environmental Biology — and 17 founding faculty members under the leadership of Edward A. Steinhaus, the school’s founding dean.
On March 12, 2014, the School was officially renamed after UCI professor and donor Francisco J. Ayala by then-Chancellor Michael V. Drake. Ayala had previously pledged to donate $10 million to the School of Biological Sciences in 2011. The school reverted to its previous name in June 2018, after a university investigation confirmed that Ayala had sexually harassed at least four women colleagues and graduate students.
On June 15, 2024, during the school's commencement ceremony, UCI announced that the school would be renamed the Charlie Dunlop School of Biological Sciences in recognition of a $50 million gift from biotech entrepreneur Charlie Dunlop, to create an endowed fund for unrestricted support of academic and research activities.


== Leadership ==
Since its founding, the school has been led by the following deans:


== Notes ==


== External links ==

Official website.
The Adam's apple is the protrusion in the neck formed by the angle of the thyroid cartilage surrounding the larynx, typically visible in men, less frequently in women. The prominence of the Adam's apple increases in most men as a secondary male sex characteristic during puberty.


== Structure ==

The topographic structure which is externally visible and colloquially called the "Adam's apple" is caused by an anatomical structure of the thyroid cartilage called the laryngeal prominence or laryngeal protuberance protruding and forming a "bump" under the skin at the front of the throat. All human beings with a normal anatomy have a laryngeal protuberance of the thyroid cartilage. This prominence is typically larger and more externally noticeable in adult males. There are two reasons for this phenomenon. Firstly, the structural size of the thyroid cartilage in males tends to increase during puberty, and the laryngeal protuberance becomes more anteriorly focused. Secondly, the larynx, which the thyroid cartilage partially envelops, increases in size in male subjects during adolescence, moving the thyroid cartilage and its laryngeal protuberance towards the front of the neck. The adolescent development of both the larynx and the thyroid cartilage in males occurs as a result of hormonal changes, especially the normal increase in testosterone production in adolescent males. In females, the laryngeal protuberance sits on the upper edge of the thyroid cartilage, and the larynx tends to be smaller in size, and so the "bump" caused by protrusion of the laryngeal protuberance is much less visible or not discernible. Even so, many women display an externally visible protrusion of the thyroid cartilage, an "Adam's apple", to varying degrees which are usually minor, and this should not normally be viewed as a medical disorder.


== Function ==
The Adam's apple, in relation with the thyroid cartilage which forms it, helps protect the walls and the frontal part of the larynx, including the vocal cords (which are located directly behind it).
Another function of the Adam's apple is related to the deepening of the voice. During adolescence, the thyroid cartilage grows together with the larynx. Consequently, the laryngeal prominence grows in size, mainly in men. Together, a larger soundboard is made up in phonation apparatus and, as a result, men get a deeper voice note.


== Society and Western culture ==

While both men and women can possess an Adam's apple, the larger frequency of its appearance in men has led to the perception of the Adam's apple as an indicator of masculinity. As such, transgender women may choose to undergo cosmetic surgery to remove it from their necks, a process known as chondrolaryngoplasty, or colloquially as a "tracheal shave". Transgender men may choose to augment and thereby enlarge the Adam's apple, a process known as masculinization.
Chondrolaryngoplasty surgery is effective, and studies done by surgeons in Tel Aviv and Los Angeles have demonstrated complications to be few and, if present, transient.
There is also an additional surgery available, feminization laryngoplasty, also known as "FemLar", which can safely reduce the Adam’s Apple to an extent greater than that which can be accomplished by a tracheal shave, given it explicitly operates on the vocal cords within the Adam's apple as opposed to avoiding them. However, feminization laryngoplasty is a reconstructive surgery that carries additional risks and has a very strong feminizing effect on the voice that may or may not be desirable to the patient. There are also far fewer practitioners who are known to be currently performing FemLar as it is far newer than the tracheal shave procedure.


== Etymology ==

The English term "Adam's apple" is a calque of Latin pomum Adami, which is found in European medical texts from as early as 1600.  "Adam's Apple" is found in a 1662 English translation of Thomas Bartholin's 1651 work Anatomia.

The 1662 citation includes an explanation for the origin of the phrase: a piece of forbidden fruit was supposedly embedded in the throat of Adam, who according to the Abrahamic religions was the first man: the common people have a belief, that by the judgment of God, a part of that fatal Apple, abode sticking in Adams Throat, and is so communicated to his posterity  This etymology is also proposed by Brewer's Dictionary of Phrase and Fable and the 1913 edition of Webster's Dictionary. The story is not found in the Bible or other Jewish, Christian, or Islamic writings.
Linguist Alexander Gode proposed in 1968 that the Latin phrase pomum Adami (literally: 'Adam's apple') was a mistranslation of the Hebrew "tappuach ha adam", meaning "male bump".  The confusion was supposedly due to the fact that in the Hebrew language the proper name "Adam" (אדם) literally means "man", and the word for "apple", "tapuach", is similar to the word "tafuach" which means "swollen", thus in combination: the swelling of a man.
The medical term "prominentia laryngea" (laryngeal prominence) was introduced by the Basle Nomina Anatomica in 1895.
In the American South, "goozle" is used colloquially to describe the laryngeal prominence, likely derived from guzzle.


== Laryngeal prominence anatomy ==


== See also ==
Hyoid bone


== References ==


== External links ==

Lesson 11 at The Anatomy Lesson by Wesley Norman (Georgetown University).
The anal pore or cytoproct is a structure in various single-celled eukaryotes where waste is ejected after the nutrients from food have been absorbed into the cytoplasm.
In ciliates, the anal pore (cytopyge) and cytostome are the only regions of the pellicle that are not covered by ridges, cilia or rigid covering. They serve as analogues of, respectively, the anus and mouth of multicellular organisms. The cytopyge's thin membrane allows vacuoles to be merged into the cell wall and emptied.


== Location ==
The anal pore is an exterior opening of microscopic organisms through which undigested food waste, water, or gas are expelled from the body. The anal pore is located on the ventral surface, usually in the posterior half of the cell. The anal pore itself is actually a structure made up of two components: piles of fibres, and microtubules. 
This structure is found in different unicellular eukaryotes like paramecium organelles. 


== Function ==
Digested nutrients from the vacuole pass into the cytoplasm, making the vacuole shrink and moves to the anal pore, where it ruptures to release the waste content to the environment outside of the cell. The cytoproct is used for the excretion of indigestible debris contained in the food vacuoles. 
Most microorganisms possess an anal pore for excretion, usually in the form of an opening on the pellicle to eject out indigestible debris. The opening and closing of the cytoproct resemble a reversible ring of tissue fusion occurring between the inner and outer layers located at the aboral end. An anal pore is not a permanently visible structure; it appears at the time of defecation and then disappears afterward.  
In paramecium, the anal pore is a region of pellicle that is not covered by ridges and cilia, and the area has thin pellicles that allow the vacuoles to be merged into the cell surface to be emptied. 
In ciliates, the anal cytostomes and cytopyge pore regions are not covered by either ridges or cilia or hard coatings like the other parts of the organism. As a food vacuole approaches the cytoproct region it actually starts to flatten out the surrounding cells, and a thin-membrane vacuole allows it to be combined in the cell wall. Once the vacuole attaches to the plasma membrane of the cell wall, the vacuole is emptied. The waste excreted by the cell can come as a membrane-bound packaged ball, or as a stream of debris behind the organism. 
Directly after secretion of the waste products, deep invagination (deep, canyon-like structure that was the vacuole) is still present. About 10 to 30 seconds after secretion, the vacuole detaches, and a new thin plasma membrane is formed. After a minute has gone by the organism's cytoproct is closed up again and the process is ready to be repeated.


== In marine animals ==

Ctenophores are marine animals which superficially resemble jellyfish, but have biradial symmetry and use eight bands of transverse ciliated plates to swim. All ctenophores possess a pair of small anal pores located adjacent to the apical sensory organ which is thought to control osmotic pressure. These pores have sometimes been interpreted as homologous with the anus of bilaterian animals (worms, humans, snails, fish, etc.). Furthermore, they possess a third tissue layer between the endoderm and ectoderm, another characteristic reminiscent of the Bilateria. Ctenophores possess a functional through-gut from which digested waste products and material distributed via the endodermal canals are expelled to the exterior environment through terminal anal pores, which are specialized to control outflow from the branched endodermal canal system. Ctenophores have no true anus; the central canal opens toward the aboral end by two small pores, through which a small amount of egestion can take place.


== References ==


== Bibliography ==
“Introduction to Ctenophora.” Introduction to the Ctenophora, https://ucmp.berkeley.edu/cnidaria/ctenophora.html.
Pang, Kevin; Martindale, Mark Q. (December 2008). "Ctenophores". Current Biology. 18 (24): R1119–R1120. Bibcode:2008CBio...18R1119P. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2008.10.004. PMID 19108762.
Presnell, Jason S.; Vandepas, Lauren E.; Warren, Kaitlyn J.; Swalla, Billie J.; Amemiya, Chris T.; Browne, William E. (October 2016). "The Presence of a Functionally Tripartite Through-Gut in Ctenophora Has Implications for Metazoan Character Trait Evolution". Current Biology. 26 (20): 2814–2820. Bibcode:2016CBio...26.2814P. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2016.08.019. PMID 27568594..
"A calorie is a calorie" is an expression used to convey the concept that sources of dietary energy are interchangeable. This concept has been subject of debate since its emergence in the early 19th century.


== History ==
In 1883, German nutritionist Max Rubner published what he called the "isodynamic law". The law claims that the basis of nutrition is the exchange of energy. In the early 1900s, Carl von Noorden applied isodynamic law to the study of obesity and developed two theories on what caused people to develop obesity. The first repeated Rubner's notion that "a calorie is a calorie". The second claimed that obesity is a consequence of how the body partitions calories for use or storage. These competing theories continue to be a source of dispute within nutrition and diet communities.


== Metabolism ==
In thermodynamics, energy cannot be created or destroyed, only converted from one form to another. In nutrition, dietary energy refers to metabolizable energy, not gross energy. The level of absorption and the thermic effect of food (TEF) both affect how much energy is made available to the body.
Absorption is the mechanism by which the human body ingests energy from food. Absorption occurs mostly in the small intestine. A relatively lesser amount of absorption—composed primarily of water—occurs in the large intestine. Energy recovered from food is used to digest and metabolize it, and to store any remaining food.
About 10% of the energy recovered from food is burned as heat, during a process called diet-induced thermogenesis (DIT), specific dynamic action (SDA), or thermic effect of food (TEF).


== Calorie counting ==
A kilocalorie is equivalent to 1000 calories or one dietary Calorie, which contains 4184 joules of energy. The notion that "a calorie is a calorie" has been used to suggest that body weight maintenance is a matter of balancing calorie intake and energy expenditure, and reducing calorie intake has been recommended as a way to reduce and maintain weight.
Calorie amounts displayed on food labels are based on the Atwater system. The accuracy of the system is disputed. In some cases the system has been found to overestimate metabolizable energy by 3–7%. A 2012 study by a USDA scientist concluded that the measured energy content of a sample of almonds was 32% lower than the estimated Atwater value.


== See also ==
Basal metabolic rate
Dieting
Empty calories
Management of obesity
Metabolism
Exercise
Satiety value
Scientific control
Sleep and metabolism
Bioavailability


== References ==.
Does Coffee Cause Cancer? And 8 More Myths about the Food We Eat is a 2023 book by Canadian cardiologist Christopher Labos. It presents information about nine health myths through a series of conversations between fictional characters.
The book uses a fictional story to present and dispel misconceptions around nine topics related to food science.
The book aims to explain why food science is complex and to debunk some of the food myths that permeate society, with an evolving relationship as a narrative. Labos' publisher suggested he emulate the fictional style of The Wealthy Barber. He ended up developing a nine-chapter story arc featuring conversations between fictional characters that mirror exchanges that Labos had with acquaintances in real life.
The chapters tell a continuous romantic story involving conversations between the protagonist and other people with whom he discussed various health topics. Mathematical and methodological discussions are appended to the text, on topics such as demographic selection and p-hacking.
Labos is hoping to write a sequel, for which he wrote a sample chapter.


== Topics ==
The book covers nine topics presented as myths.

Vitamin C fights the common cold.
Hot dogs are as bad as cigarettes.
Some salt is good for you.
Coffee causes cancer
Red wine's good for you heart
Chocolate is health food
Breakfast's the most important meal of the day
Caffeine can trigger heart attacks
Vitamin D is the cure for everything


== Reception ==
The reviews published in local and specialized publications were positive, noting the narrative structure and the informational content.
In The Suburban, Mike Cohen calls it a "fascinating, refreshingly clarifying new book".
On AIPT Science, Adrienne Hill highlights the efforts made by Labos to make the science accessible: "The explanations are straightforward, using analogies to help understand counterintuitive reasoning and conclusions, with a good dose of humor intermixed."
In the Miramichi Reader, Lisa Timpf focused on the readability of the text for a wide audience: "Snappy dialogue, humorous misunderstandings, and some mild teasing about statistics are some of the avenues Labos uses to deliver a laugh."


== References ==.
Food Valley is a region in the Netherlands where international food companies, research institutes, and Wageningen University and Research Centre are concentrated. The Food Valley area is the home of a large number of food multinationals and within the Food Valley about 15,000 professionals are active in food related sciences and technological development. Far more are involved in the manufacturing of food products. Food Valley, with the city of Wageningen as its center, is intended to form a dynamic heart of knowledge for the international food industry.
Within this region, Foodvalley NL is intended to create conditions so that food manufacturers and knowledge institutes can work together in developing new and innovating food concepts.


== Current research about the Food Valley ==
The Food Valley as a region has been the subject of study by several human geographers. Even before the Food Valley was established as an organisation in 2004 and as a region in 2011 Frank Kraak and Frits Oevering made a SWOT analysis of the region using an Evolutionary economics framework and compared it with similar regions in Canada, Denmark, Italy and Sweden. A similar study was done by Floris Wieberdink. The study utilised Geomarketing concepts in the WERV, the predecessor of the Regio Food Valley. Geijer and Van der Velden studied the economic development of the Regio Food Valley using statistical data.


=== Discussion ===
The research performed in the Food Valley has generated some discussion about the influence of culture on economic growth. Wieberdink argued that culture and habitat are not spatially bounded, but historically. More recently a study about the Food Valley argued that culture and habitat are in fact spatially bounded. Both studies, however, recommend the Regio Food Valley to promote its distinct culture.


== See also ==


== References ==.

== List of useful microorganisms used in preparation of food and beverage ==


== See also ==
Fermentation (food)
Food microbiology


== References ==.
The Protein Dispersibility Index (PDI) is a means of comparing the solubility of a protein in water, and is widely used in the soybean product industry.
A sample of the soybeans are ground, mixed with a specific quantity of water, and the two are then blended together at a specific rpm for a specific time. The resulting mixture and original bean flour then have their protein content measured using a combustion test, and the PDI is calculated as the percentage of the protein in the mix divided by the percentage in the flour - a PDI of 100 therefore indicates total solubility.
It has been shown that the PDI can be affected, not only by the type of soybean used, but also by manufacturing processes - heat has been shown to lower the PDI.
The PDI required of a soyflour is dependent on the purpose to which the soybeans are to be put. Manufacturers of soymilk and tofu products want a high PDI to ensure the maximum protein content in their products. However, manufacturers of soy-based fish feed require a low PDI to avoid loss of valuable protein into the surrounding water.


== References ==

Dudley-Cash, W.A. 1999. Methods for determining quality of soybean meal protein important. Feedstuffs. 71(1):10-11..
Anecdotal cognitivism is a method of research using anecdotal, and anthropomorphic evidence through the observation of animal behaviour. A psychological methodology that attributes mental states to animals on the basis of anecdotes and on the observation of particular cases, other than those observations made during controlled experiments. The purpose is to understand by what means animals interpret external stimuli from the world around them, and subsequently how and why they act on that information. Charles Darwin devised this method in the late nineteenth century, naming it anecdotal cognitivism. This method proved controversial within the academy for the first half of the twentieth century, as Behaviourist methods were favoured at this time. Behaviourists maintain that controlled experiments are necessary to measure stimuli and record observable behaviour. From the middle of the twentieth century ethology and later, cognitive ethology became increasingly important within the scientific and academic milieu.
After the introduction of natural history documentary film production in the 1960s animal behaviour became popular in the general population. Presenters, such as David Attenborough on BBC England and George Page on PBS America, used anecdotes and anthropomorphic rhetoric thus providing access to a wider audience, increasing awareness and interest in animal behaviour and their relationship with humans and nature.


== History ==

Contemporary scientific interest in animal minds, cognition and behaviour stem from Charles Darwin's nineteenth century seminal text, Theory of Evolution. Rather than showing the reader a series of tables, statistics and diagrams Darwin informed the reader with examples of animal behaviour he collected from both his observations, and the observations of others from all over the world. Anecdotal cognitivism was also practiced in his 1872 publication, The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals, with theories relating to the universality and evolution of the facial expressions in animals. Darwin's interest in the mental states of animals instigated the anecdotal cognitivism method which involved collecting stories about animal behaviour from both lay people and amateur naturalists. These stories provided evidence of the cognitive states in particular animal cases. Evidence collected was often from a single witness whose account of the incident may have been second or third hand and was often not from a scientifically trained person.
In the late nineteenth and early twentieth century, anecdotal cognitivism's method was widely criticised in the broader Western scientific community which had come to favour behaviourism. Behaviourism is a cause and effect quantitative data approach and a method scientist argued had greater rigour. Post 1930, anecdotal cognitivism was abandoned for the better part of the twentieth century due to the dominance of the behaviourist approach.


== Methods ==
Many academic disciplines contribute to the study of animal cognition and behaviour. Some example include: animal studies, anthropology, biology, psychology, and philosophy. Within each discipline a range of methodologies are implemented to record research. Two central methods are laboratory experiments to uncover systems and structures of behaviour as used by psychologists, and observational methods are more commonly used by ethologists and biologists to explain evolutionary behaviour.
There are three philosophical issues in studying minds and cognition in animals. Methodological issues, or how to study animal minds, is the philosophical issue relating to anecdotal cognitivism. The other two are foundational issues, whether animals are worthwhile subjects of study and specific issues relating to the different discipline's approaches to methodologies in academia.


== Criticism of anecdotal cognitivism ==
Anecdotal cognitivism is often criticised by behaviourists for relying on specific cases as evidence of particular animal behaviour, such as that of Clever Hans. Clever Hans was a particularly clever horse, able to interpret his masters body language while carrying out simple arithmetic and answering various simple questions. These involuntary movements made by the owner Mr von Osten, were unconscious and led to the horse being able to correctly answer questions based on the very subtle angle changes of Mr von Osten's head. This case study was often cited by scientists as reasoning against the validity of using this methodology because this singular case was proved to be inaccurate. This exemplified the importance of eradicating unintentional cueing while researching animals and was the argument behaviourists cited for controlled procedures.


== Historical Western theorists ==


=== Supportive of anecdotal cognitivism ===


==== George Romanes: (1848–1894) ====
A protégé of Charles Darwin, George Romanes continued using anecdotal methodologies. Romanes documented an account that exemplifies this methodology, the example; a hunter who had shot and wounded a monkey, this monkey then held his blood-stained hand out to the hunter "to make him feel guilty". As Romanes did not further investigate the anecdotes with test experiments to consider an alternative hypothesis, this method became contentious among his fellow scientists. According to Professor Frans de Waal from Emory University, Romanes reliance on these singular events and Darwin's internal subjective thinking to explain his own research experiences is what led subsequent scientists to favour the behaviourist approach. Behaviourists were also concerned with the lack of statistical information collected with a particular interest in certain behaviours and a perceived bias from subjects whilst relaying their stories.


==== Lloyd Morgan: (1852–1936) ====
Lloyd Morgan, a British psychologist and student of Romanes, removed the anecdotal methodologies from his work to avoid criticism and to ensure an objective systematic speculation and research approach. He was in favour of associating the mental states of animals by interpreting animal behaviour through introspection, though he was cautious of how humans over-intellectualise animal behaviour, as in the case of Clever Hans. In 1894, Morgan developed the methodology that most psychologists now follow, known as Morgan's Canon.


=== Criticism of anecdotal cognitivism ===
The behaviourists' critique of the anecdotal, anthropomorphic methods as subjective, rejected the possibility of internal states in animals, and were more interested in human control over animals than natural behaviour.


==== John B. Watson: (1878–1958) ====
Considered the founder of behaviourism, American psychologist John B. Watson studied animal psychology and was critical of introspective psychology and anecdotal cognitivism. He thought it inferior to objective, observable experiments and did not accept the experimental observer's behaviour could be influenced by the subjective experience. In 1909, at Johns Hopkins School of Medicine's Southern Society for Philosophy and Psychology, Watson stated that "these trends away from introspection will lead psychology toward the perfection of technique of the physical sciences." Later, in 1913 he declared, "never use the term consciousness, mental state, mind, content, introspectively verifiable, imagery and the like...it can be done in terms of stimulus and response, in terms of habit formation, habit integrations and the like."


==== Jacques Loeb: (1859–1924) ====
Loeb, a mechanist physiologist, believed animal behaviour was of no particular purpose or design and could be explained in terms of environmental stimulus. He was known for attentive scientific research and as a founder to behaviourism. Thomas H. Leahey, Professor Emeritus of Virginia Commonwealth University noted that European physiologists of the early twentieth century including Loeb, "pronounced psychological concepts "superstitions" and found no room for animal consciousness in the explanation of animal behaviour."


==== E. L. Thorndikes: (1874–1949) ====

Both Edward Thorndike's puzzle boxes and PhD thesis, penned in 1898 at Columbia University, were modelled off previous work by Romanes and Morgan. Thorndike expected to assert similar connections to animal learning through imitation and passive tuition as his predecessors. As his extensive laboratory research and observations of cats and dog's ability to escape the boxes came to a close, he found that the research conclusions greatly differed to what he expected (that animals could learn from imitation). This was the beginning of his research into "motor impulse." Thorndike was highly critical of the 'anecdotalist school' and their lack of measurable and scientific methodologies. Thorndike later went on to study The Law of Effect and S-R bonds (Stimulus-Response) and contribute to educational psychology.


==== Burrhus Frederick Skinner: (1904–1990) ====
After WWII, B. F. Skinner's radical behaviourism gained popularity, he "applied [Auguste] Comte's vision to psychology" maintaining that science's goal was to ultimately control society with little need for introspection and maintained that mental processes were unobservable and illegitimate. His theory borrowed some of Darwin's evolutionary theory, though he believed human behaviour was explained through environment. Skinner was focused on a methodology of observation alone. According to Thomas H. Leahey, Professor Emeritus, Virginia Commonwealth University "Skinner believed that truth is to be found in observations themselves, in "does" and "doesn't" rather than in our interpretations of our observations."


== Non-Western approaches ==
Japan: Studies of Ethology in Japan have regularly used anthropomorphism and anecdotal methods, Japanese culture did not follow the rationalist American behaviourist approach. The cultural differences between the two countries underpin the different methods used to investigate animal behaviour in the academic disciplines. A reason scholars cite for this difference is Japan's spiritual foundation of animism in Shintoism and Buddhism, where animate and inanimate objects have spirits.


== Current discussions ==
Within Classic Ethology, Darwin's anecdotal and anthropomorphic approach was modified by European researchers. Classical Ethologists, Konrad Lorenz (1903–1989) and Niko Tinbergen (1907–1988), undertook a return to Darwin's evolutionary theory and natural history with a reliance on more meticulous anecdotal and anthropomorphic methodologies. The research carried out by both scientists focused on observations, free use of anecdotes and an emphasis on emotion and inner states, "instincts", "drives", "motivational impulses" and "outward flowing nervous energy". In 1973 they were awarded the Nobel Prize with Karl von Frisch (1886–1982) for animal behaviour and were the founders of the field of ethology.

Though there are many differences between the schools of behaviourism and ethology, they agreed upon scepticism of the "folk" interpretations of over emphasising anecdotes to explain animal intelligence.
There has been a resurgence in the adaption and use of this method in the twenty-first century. In current research this methodology has evolved and is no longer called 'anecdotal cognitivism,' with the scientific vernacular having changed to 'cognitive ethology' a term coined by Don Griffin, which involves anecdotal and anthropomorphic observations with reference to the cognition, internal states and behaviour analysis of animals. Ethograms, a quantitative method consisting of an inventory table of descriptions, are used to document typical animal behaviour. In unusual or rare animal behaviour, an "incident" or "qualitative report" is written rather than referencing the term "anecdote", due to the negative connotation that resulted from Darwin's method.


== Current theorists' support ==

There has been a significant shift from the behaviourist methodologies, as Professor Frans de Waal states,
"We seek ecological validity in our studies and follow the advice of Uexkull, Lorenz, and Imanishi, who encouraged human empathy as a way to understand other species. True empathy is not self-focused but other-oriented." De Waal also states anecdotes are appropriate to use in contemporary settings as long as they are videoed, or observed by a reputable observer aware and familiar with the animals in question.
This is further evidenced in Sara Shettleworth's work. A professor of ecology and evolutionary biology at the University of Toronto, Shettleworth maintains the most exciting part of current study in animal cognition is detail and subtlety in the human picture of "how other species minds are both like and not like ours."
Emeritus Professor in Animal Behaviour at University of New England, Gisela Kaplan noted the consolatory behaviour of Australian Magpies post conflict exhibited behaviour similar to the image seen in Darwin's crouching dog (figure 6 above), in The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals. Using anecdotes, Kaplan said that over several occasions it was noted that the "magpie standing with hunched up wings in a little spatial isolation from the others (presumably the victim)" would be met by a member of the flock that went over and extended its neck over the victim or touched the isolated bird. The isolated bird would "untangle" and after a minute was led back to the group.
There are advantages in the use of historical anecdotal cognitivism from a pedagogical standpoint. The disciplinary objective of anecdotes, as it pertains to the teaching of science, provides the purpose of conveying information and explaining concepts. There are also cultural factors where the anecdotes provide a humanistic perspective to science, and of how science is evaluated and created by the scientists in a social science perspective.
There have been many studies into Darwin's language and writing style. The style Darwin wrote in was seen as accessible prose with regular use of anecdotes and metaphors. This writing style made his texts more widely accessible and was instrumental in them becoming best sellers and popular within the broader community. As stated by Phillip Prodger, Darwin's theories were rapidly accepted by the public due to his writing style, "He wrote in clear, lucid language flavoured with pleasing anecdotes and clear examples."


== Current theorists' criticism ==
Researchers such as Nathan Emery and Nicola Clayton disagree, stating that any use of anecdotes, anthropomorphism and anthropocentrism are inappropriate and must be avoided in the study of animal cognition, citing the Clever Hans experiment and the walnut dropping crow study by Cristol et la. Emery and Clayton state, "Given how easy it is for us, as humans, to place a human perspective on a problem, it may be an especially important caution when studying the mental lives of animals."


== Film industry and popular culture ==

Documentary film production, a source of education and entertainment popularised by natural history subjects including animal behaviour, became prominent in the later decades of the twentieth century. Natural history films and series, such as David Attenborough's Life on Earth in the 1970s, BBC's Planet Earth II in 2016 and the PBS Nature series by George Page, have contributed to people's awareness of animal behaviour, creating connection to nature and stimulating engagement in the ecological impact of humans on the planet at a time when more people are living in cities, disconnected from nature.
George Page writes of anecdotal cases in Inside the Animal Mind, of primatologist Jane Goodall who cites evidence of emotions and mental states of chimpanzees, who adopt young chimps that are not their own. Also cited are stories of elephant behaviour from ethologist, elephant researcher and founder of Amboseli Elephant Research Project, Cynthia Moss. Moss notes the playful elephant behaviour in a matriarchal environment and contrasts this with the terror observed of elephants witnessing other elephants during a culling. While presenting for Nature, Page heard many stories about this behaviour from scientists, which led Page to believe that science and lay people benefit from greater understanding when anecdotes and anthropomorphic interpretations are allowed to be documented.


== Interesting facts ==

Charles Darwin: Darwin had great affection for dogs, owning many in his lifetime. Shelah, Spark and Czar in his teen years, Sappho, Fun, Dash, Pincher and Nina in his early adulthood and when he had his own children Bob, Bran, Quiz, Tartar, Tony, Pepper, Butterton and Polly, whom he regularly incorporated into his studies. In The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals, Darwin used anecdotes to explain his theories. Darwin described the 'hothouse face,' an expression Bob, Darwin's pie-bald family dog used expressing dejection when a dog becomes disappointed, expecting a walk that does not materialise. Darwin's later years were spent with Polly, a white terrier, his favourite dog and the last dog he owned. Darwin mentioned Polly in The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals as licking his hand with "insatiable passion." Polly was put down by Francis, Darwin's son days after Darwin's fatal heart attack, as Emma Darwin noted "Polly became very ill with a swelling in her throat...creeping away several times as if to die" and was buried in the family garden.
David Attenborough: Attenborough believes the most significant publication on nature and animal behaviour is Charles Darwin's, On the Origin of Species explaining the evolution and natural selection theory foundational to societies' understanding of nature.
Jane Goodall: Goodall, a primatologist, was an unorthodox researcher. Her work led to new discoveries of behaviour in chimpanzee's such as tool use and the primate carnivorous diet. Professor Robert Hinde, research Professor at the University of Cambridge was initially critical of the unconventional methods Goodall employed. Goodall was criticised for naming the chimps she observed at Gombe in Tanzania, she called one David Greybeard and showed photo's of him using tools to access termites at the Zoological Society of London conference in 1962. Goodall was not the only primatologist to name chimps while in the field, biologist Professor George Schaller also named the subjects he studied. Sir Solly Zuckerman, an anatomist at the Zoological Society of London April 1962, criticised Goodall for using anecdotes,
"There are those who are here and who prefer anecdote – and what I must confess I regard as sometimes unbounded speculation, in scientific work it is far safer to base one's major conclusions and generalisations on a concordant and large body of data than on a few contradictory and isolated observations, the explanation of which sometimes leaves a little to be desired."
By observing the chimpanzee troop in their native habitat in the 1960s, Goodall came to the conclusion counter to the scientific community at this time that chimpanzees had distinct personalities and were capable of friendship and altruism. Some behaviours and emotions observed included nervousness, aggression, hugging, kissing, grudges, kicking, punching, subordination to a dominant character and friendship.
Jane Goodall writes about her studies of the Chimpanzee's in Gombe in her book, Reason for Hope, in anthropomorphic terms enabling the reader a more personal understanding of her observations encountered in Tanzania.


== See also ==

Charles Darwin
Ethology
History of Science


== References ==


=== Bibliography ===
Andrews, Kristin. "Animal Cognition", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2016 Edition) Edward N. Zalta (ed.).
Attenborough, David. 2016. "If David Attenborough could be an animal he'd be a sloth," interview by Kara Segedin, earth, BBC, 7 January 2016, viewed 14 April 2020, [1]
Bekoff, Marc and Jamieson, Dale. 1999. "On Aims and Methods of cognitive Ethology" in Reading in Animal Cognition. Colorado: Westview Press.
Boakes, Robert. 1984. From Darwin to Behaviourism: Psychology and the minds of animals. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Chapman, James. 2015. A New History of British Documentary Basingstoke, U.K: Palgrave Macmillan.
De Waal, Frans. 2016. Are We Smart Enough to Know How Smart Animals Are? New York: W.W. Norton & Co.
DeKoven, Marianne. 2006. "Women, Animals, and Jane Goodall: "Reason for Hope"." Tulsa Studies in Women's Literature 25, no. 1: 141–51. Accessed 22 April 2020. doi:10.2307/20455265.
Emery J. Nathan and Clayton S. Nicola. 2005. "Animal Cognition" in The Behaviour of Animals: Mechanisms, Function, and Evolution. edited by Bolhuis, John J. and Giraldeau Luc-Alain. Oxford: Blackwell publishing.
Fernandez-Bellon, Dario and Kane, Adam. "Natural History films raise species awareness – A big data approach," in A Journal of the Society for Conservation biology, (September 2019), pp. 1–2. [2]
Gauld, Colin. 1992. "The Historical Anecdote as a "caricature": A Case Study." Research in Science Education, 22, no. 1 (December 1992) pp. 149–156.
Harel, Kay. 2008. "'It's Dogged as Does It': A Biography of the Everpresent Canine in Charles Darwin's Days," Southwest Review vol 93, no. 3, pp. 368–378.
Kaplan, Gisela. 2015. Bird Minds: Cognition and Behaviour of Australian Native Birds. Clayton South, Victoria: CSIRO Publishing.
Leahey, Thomas Hardy. 2013. A history of Psychology. New Jersey: Pearson Education Inc.
Mitchell, Megan. 2017. "Contemporaries, Criticisms and Controversies," in Jane Goodall: Primatologist and UN Messenger of Peace. New York: Cavendish.
Norenzayan, Ara. 2002. "Cultural preferences for formal verses intuitive reasoning," Cognitive Science vol 26, pg. 653–684.
Page, George. 1999. Inside the Animal Mind. New York: Doubleday Publishing.
Prodger, Phillip. 2009. Darwin's Camera Art and Photography in the Theory of Evolution. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Shettleworth, Sara J. 2010. Cognition, Evolution, and Behaviour. New York: Oxford University Press.
Townshend, Emma. 2009. Darwin's Dogs: How Darwin's pets helped form a world-changing theory of evolution. London: Frances Lincoln.
Wood, Matthew. "The Potential for Anthropomorphism in Communicating Science: Inspiration from Japan." Cultures of Science 2, no. 1 (March 2019): 23–34. doi:10.1177/209660831900200103.
Wynne, Clive, D. L. 2001. Animal Cognition: The Mental Lives of Animals. New York: Palgrave.


=== Citations ===


== Further reading ==
Allen, Colin (1998) "Assessing Animal Cognition: Ethological and Philosophical Perspectives" Journal of Animal Science 76: pp. 42—47;
Watson, Amy and Woodworth, Kristen (2000) "Animal Cognition" - outline of animal cognition;
Andrews, Kristin. 2015. The Animal Mind : an Introduction to the Philosophy of Animal Cognition New York, N.Y: Routledge.
Allen, Colin., and Marc. Bekoff. 1997. Species of Mind : the Philosophy and Biology of Cognitive Ethology Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Lurz, Robert W., (ed) 2009. The Philosophy of Animal Minds. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511819001. ISBN 978-0521711814
Lehner, Philip. 1998. Handbook of Ethological Methods. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0521637503


== External links ==
Tree of Life web project
Dr Cook, Robert, Animal Cognition and learning, 2013, Tufts University
Gong, Michelle and Miller, Stella, "Unorthodox Approaches" in Reinventing Our Understanding of Humanity: Jane Goodall's Exploration of Chimpanzees and Encounters with the Scientific World
Three Observers of Animal behaviour
Charlie Rose Interview with George Page, Inside the Animal Mind, Nature, 2000, PBS
Attenborough, David, IMDb Filmography for films and TV series written, produced or directed by David Attenborough
Bonnin, Liz, 2013, Animal Odd Couples" on YouTube BBC Documentary
Amboseli Trust for Elephants, Dr Cynthia Moss Foundation, https://www.elephanttrust.org/index.php/meet-the-team/item/dr-cynthia-moss.
History and Philosophy of the Life Sciences is a quarterly peer-reviewed academic journal covering the history and philosophy of biology. It was established in 1979 and is published by Springer Science+Business Media. The editors in chief are Sabina Leonelli and Giovanni Boniolo. According to the Journal Citation Reports, the journal has a 2017 impact factor of 0.559.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
HPLS on JSTOR
HPLS on Twitter.
The history of plant systematics—the biological classification of plants—stretches from the work of ancient Greek to modern evolutionary biologists. As a field of science, plant systematics came into being only slowly, early plant lore usually being treated as part of the study of medicine. Later, classification and description was driven by natural history and natural theology. Until the advent of the theory of evolution, nearly all classification was based on the scala naturae. The professionalization of botany in the 18th and 19th century marked a shift toward more holistic classification methods, eventually based on evolutionary relationships.


== Antiquity ==
The peripatetic philosopher Theophrastus (372–287 BC), as a student of Aristotle in Ancient Greece, wrote Historia Plantarum, the earliest surviving treatise on plants, where he listed the names of over 500 plant species. He did not articulate a formal classification scheme, but relied on the common groupings of folk taxonomy combined with growth form: tree shrub; undershrub; or herb.
The De Materia Medica of Dioscorides was an important early compendium of plant descriptions (over five hundred), classifying plants chiefly by their medicinal effects.


== Medieval ==
The Byzantine emperor Constantine VII sent a copy of Dioscorides' pharmacopeia to the Umayyad Caliph Abd al-Rahman III who ruled Córdoba in the 9th century, and also sent a monk named Nicolas to translate the book into Arabic. It was in use from its publication in the 1st century until the 16th century, making it one of the major herbals throughout the Middle Ages. The taxonomy criteria of medieval texts is different from what is used today. Plants with similar external appearance were usually grouped under the same species name, though in modern taxonomy they are considered different.
Abū l-Khayr's botanical work is the most complete Andalusi botanical text known to modern scholars. It is noted for its detailed descriptions of plant morphology and phenology.


== Early modern period ==

In the 16th century, works by Otto Brunfels, Hieronymus Bock, and Leonhart Fuchs helped to revive interest in natural history based on first-hand observation; Bock in particular included environmental and life cycle information in his descriptions. With the influx of exotic species in the Age of Exploration, the number of known species expanded rapidly, but most authors were far more interested in the medicinal properties of individual plants than an overarching classification system. Later influential Renaissance books include those of Caspar Bauhin and Andrea Cesalpino. Bauhin described over 6000 plants, which he arranged into 12 books and 72 sections based on a wide range of common characteristics. Cesalpino based his system on the structure of the organs of fructification, using the Aristotelian technique of logical division.
In the late 17th century, the most influential classification schemes were those of English botanist and natural theologian John Ray and French botanist Joseph Pitton de Tournefort. Ray, who listed over 18,000 plant species in his works, is credited with establishing the monocot/dicot division and some of his groups—mustards, mints, legumes and grasses—stand today (though under modern family names). Tournefort used an artificial system based on logical division which was widely adopted in France and elsewhere in Europe up until Linnaeus.
The book that had an enormous accelerating effect on the science of plant systematics was Species Plantarum (1753) by Linnaeus. It presented a complete list of the plant species then known to Europe, ordered for the purpose of easy identification using the number and arrangement of the male and female sexual organs of the plants. Of the groups in this book, the highest rank that continues to be used today is the genus. The consistent use of binomial nomenclature along with a complete listing of all plants provided a huge stimulus for the field.
Although meticulous, the classification of Linnaeus served merely as an identification manual; it was based on phenetics and did not regard evolutionary relationships among species. It assumed that plant species were given by God and that what remained for humans was to recognise them and use them (a Christian reformulation of the scala naturae or Great Chain of Being). Linnaeus was quite aware that the arrangement of species in the Species Plantarum was not a natural system, i.e. did not express relationships. However he did present some ideas of plant relationships elsewhere.


== Modern and contemporary periods ==
Significant contributions to plant classification came from de Jussieu (inspired by the work of Michel Adanson) in 1789 and the early nineteenth century saw the start of work by de Candolle, culminating in the Prodromus.
A major influence on plant systematics was the theory of evolution (Charles Darwin published Origin of Species in 1859), resulting in the aim to group plants by their phylogenetic relationships. To this was added the interest in plant anatomy, aided by the use of the light microscope and the rise of chemistry, allowing the analysis of secondary metabolites.
Currently, the strict use of epithets in botany, although regulated by international codes, is considered unpractical and outdated. The very notion of species, the fundamental classification unit, is often up to subjective intuition and thus can not be well defined. As a result, estimate of the total number of existing "species" (ranging from 2 million to 100 million) becomes a matter of preference.
While scientists have agreed for some time that a functional and objective classification system must reflect actual evolutionary processes and genetic relationships, the technological means for creating such a system did not exist until recently. In the 1990s DNA technology saw immense progress, resulting in unprecedented accumulation of DNA sequence data from various genes present in compartments of plant cells. In 1998 a ground-breaking classification of the angiosperms (the APG system) consolidated molecular phylogenetics (and especially cladistics or phylogenetic systematics) as the best available method. For the first time relatedness could be measured in real terms, namely similarity of the molecules comprising the genetic code.


== Timeline of publications ==

Theophrastus. Historia Plantarum.
Dioscorides, Plinius. De Materia Medica.
Cesalpino, Andrea (1583). De plantis libri XVI.
Ray, John (1686). Historia Plantarum.
Linnaeus, Carl (1753). Species Plantarum.
Adanson, Michel (1763). Familles des plantes. Vincent.
de Jussieu; Antoine Laurent (1789). Genera Plantarum, secundum ordines naturales disposita juxta methodum in Horto Regio Parisiensi exaratam. apud viduam Herissant, typographum, viâ novâ B. M. sub signo Crucis aureæ.
de Candolle; A. P.; et al. (1824–1873). Prodromus systemati naturalis regni vegetabilis sive enumeratio contracta ordinum, generum specierumque plantarum huc usque cognitarum, juxta methodi naturalis normas digesta.
Lindley, John (1846). The Vegetable Kingdom. (In English, with list of systems since 1703 (John Ray) until 1845)


== See also ==

History of botany
Conservation movement
Environmental protection
Ethnobotany
Automated species identification
Pl@ntNet


== References ==.
Antibiosis, also referred to as antagonism, a process of biological interaction between two or more organisms that is detrimental to at least one of them; it can also be an antagonistic association between an organism and the metabolic substances produced by another. Antibiosis can occur through a variety of mechanisms, with "injury, death, reduced longevity, or reduced reproduction of the pest" being common. The process of antibiosis is either reversible or irreversible, and is caused by the production of volatile organic compounds by plant-growth-promoting rhizobacterium (PGPR). Antibiosis is one of two forms of amensalism, the other form being competition. Primary examples of antibiosis include "antibacterial activity against bacteria, fungus, nematodes, insects, and occasionally against plants and algae". 


== Examples of Antibiosis ==


=== Antibiosis in biotech and medical treatment ===
The study of antibiosis and its role in antibiotics has led to the expansion of knowledge in the field of microbiology. Molecular processes such cell wall synthesis and recycling, for example, have become better understood through the study of how antibiotics affect beta-lactam development through the antibiosis relationship and interaction of the particular drugs with the bacteria subjected to the compound. For example, the Penicillium fungi responds to bacterial infections by producing penicillin, which is toxic to bacteria and is commonly used in medical settings as an effective treatment for bacterial infections. Penicillin belongs to the beta-lactam antibiotic class.


=== Host plant resistance through antibiosis ===
Antibiosis is typically studied in host plant populations and extends to the insects which feed upon them. Antibiosis can be seen in certain vegetables, as antibiosis mechanisms have been found in Brassica species to protect against cabbage whitefly. 
"Antibiosis resistance affects the biology of the insect so pest abundance and subsequent damage is reduced compared to that which would have occurred if the insect was on a susceptible crop variety. Antibiosis resistance often results in increased mortality or reduced longevity and reproduction of the insect."
During a study of antibiosis, it was determined that the key to achieving effective antibiosis relies on the organism being sessile. "When you give antibiotic-producing bacteria a structured medium, they affix to substrate, grow clonally, and produce a 'no man's land,' absent competitors, where the antibiotics diffuse outward." Antibiosis is most effective when resources are neither plentiful nor sparse. Antibiosis should be considered as the median on the scale of resource, due to its ideal performance. 


=== Other examples ===
The black walnut, Juglans nigra, produces a secretion called juglone, which is toxic to a variety of flowers, herbaceous plants, and field crops. This toxic secretion creates an area surrounding the black walnut tree that is uninhabitable to most species.
In many environments, antibiosis can promote mutualisms and/or competition between species in an ecosystem. Attine ants provide an example of a more complex antibiosis mechanism. Attine ants maintain cultivations of Leucocoprinus fungi as their primary source of consumption, however, a parasitic fungal genus, Escovopsis, feeds on Leucocoprinus and disrupts the food system of the ants. In response to this, attine ants encourage growth of the Pseudonocardia actinomycete, as it produces an antimicrobial compound that suppresses the parasitic Escovopsis. The attine ants, Leucocoprinus fungi and Pseudonocardia actinomycete all benefit in this interaction, however it is detrimental to the Escovopsis fungi.


== See also ==
Antibiotic
Biological pest control
Biotechnology
Symbiosis
Plant defense against herbivory
Secondary metabolite
Competition (biology)


== References ==


== Further reading ==


== External links ==.
In biology and medicine, a host is a larger organism that harbours a smaller organism; whether a parasitic, a mutualistic, or a commensalist guest (symbiont). The guest is typically provided with nourishment and shelter. Examples include animals playing host to parasitic worms (e.g. nematodes), cells harbouring pathogenic (disease-causing) viruses, or a bean plant hosting mutualistic (helpful) nitrogen-fixing bacteria. More specifically in botany, a host plant supplies food resources to micropredators, which have an evolutionarily stable relationship with their hosts similar to ectoparasitism. The host range is the collection of hosts that an organism can use as a partner.


== Symbiosis ==

Symbiosis spans a wide variety of possible relationships between organisms, differing in their permanence and their effects on the two parties. If one of the partners in an association is much larger than the other, it is generally known as the host. In parasitism, the parasite benefits at the host's expense. In commensalism, the two live together without harming each other, while in mutualism, both parties benefit.
Most parasites are only parasitic for part of their life cycle. By comparing parasites with their closest free-living relatives, parasitism has been shown to have evolved on at least 233 separate occasions. Some organisms live in close association with a host and only become parasitic when environmental conditions deteriorate.
A parasite may have a long-term relationship with its host, as is the case with all endoparasites. The guest seeks out the host and obtains food or another service from it, but does not usually kill it. In contrast, a parasitoid spends a large part of its life within or on a single host, ultimately causing the host's death, with some of the strategies involved verging on predation. Generally, the host is kept alive until the parasitoid is fully grown and ready to pass on to its next life stage. A guest's relationship with its host may be intermittent or temporary, perhaps associated with multiple hosts, making the relationship equivalent to the herbivory of a wild-living animal. Another possibility is that the host–guest relationship may have no permanent physical contact, as in the brood parasitism of the cuckoo.


== Hosts to parasites ==

Parasites follow a wide variety of evolutionary strategies, placing their hosts in an equally wide range of relationships. Parasitism implies host–parasite coevolution, including the maintenance of gene polymorphisms in the host, where there is a trade-off between the advantage of resistance to a parasite and a cost such as disease caused by the gene.


=== Types of hosts ===
Definitive or primary host – an organism in which the parasite reaches the adult stage and reproduces sexually, if possible. This is the final host.
Secondary or intermediate host – an organism that harbors the sexually immature parasite and is required by the parasite to undergo development and complete its life cycle. It often acts as a vector of the parasite to reach its definitive host. For example, Dirofilaria immitis, the heartworm of dogs, uses the mosquito as its intermediate host until it matures into the infective L3 larval stage.
It is not always easy or even possible to identify which host is definitive and which secondary. The life cycles of many parasites are not well understood, and the subjectively or economically more important organism may initially be designated incorrectly as primary.  Mislabelling may continue even after the error becomes known. For example trout and salmon are sometimes said to be "primary hosts" for salmonid whirling disease, even though the myxosporean parasite reproduces sexually inside the sludge worm.  And where the host harbors the different parasite's phases at different sites within its body, the host is both intermediate and definitive: for example trichinosis, a disease caused by roundworms, where the host has immature juveniles in its muscles and reproductive adults in its digestive tract.

Paratenic or transport host – an organism that harbors the sexually immature parasite but is not necessary for the parasite's development cycle to progress. Paratenic hosts serve as "dumps" for non-mature stages of a parasite in which they can accumulate in high numbers. The trematode Alaria americana is an example: the so-called mesocercarial stages of this parasite reside in tadpoles, which are rarely eaten by the definitive canine host. The tadpoles (or the frogs, following metamorphosis) are more frequently preyed on by snakes, which then function as paratenic hosts: the mesocercariae do not undergo further development there, but may accumulate, and infect the definitive host once the snake is consumed by a canid. The nematode Skrjabingylus nasicola is another example, with slugs as the intermediate hosts, shrews and rodents as the paratenic hosts, and mustelids as the definitive hosts.
Dead-end, incidental, or accidental host – an organism that generally does not allow transmission to the definitive host, thereby preventing the parasite from completing its development. For example, humans and horses are dead-end hosts for West Nile virus, whose life cycle is normally between culicine mosquitoes and birds. People and horses can become infected, but the level of virus in their blood does not become high enough to pass on the infection to mosquitoes that bite them.
Reservoir host – an organism that harbors a pathogen but suffers no ill effects. However, it serves as a source of infection to other species that are susceptible, with important implications for disease control. A reservoir host individual may be reinfected several times.


=== Plant hosts of micropredators ===

Micropredation is an evolutionarily stable strategy within parasitism, in which a small predator lives parasitically on a much larger host plant, eating parts of it.
The range of plants on which a herbivorous insect feeds is known as its host range. This can be wide or narrow, but it never includes all plants. A small number of insects are monophagous, feeding on a single plant. The silkworm larva is one of these, with mulberry leaves being the only food consumed. More often, an insect with a limited host range is oligophagous, being restricted to a few closely related species, usually in the same plant family. The diamondback moth is an example of this, feeding exclusively on brassicas, and the larva of the potato tuber moth feeds on potatoes, tomatoes and tobacco, all members of the same plant family, Solanaceae. Herbivorous insects with a wide range of hosts in various different plant families are known as polyphagous. One example is the buff ermine moth whose larvae feed on alder, mint, plantain, oak, rhubarb, currant, blackberry, dock, ragwort, nettle and honeysuckle.

Plants often produce toxic or unpalatable secondary metabolites to deter herbivores from feeding on them. Monophagous insects have developed specific adaptations to overcome those in their specialist hosts, giving them an advantage over polyphagous species. However, this puts them at greater risk of extinction if their chosen hosts suffer setbacks. Monophagous species are able to feed on the tender young foliage with high concentrations of damaging chemicals on which polyphagous species cannot feed, having to make do with older leaves. There is a trade off between offspring quality and quantity; the specialist maximises the chances of its young thriving by paying great attention to the choice of host, while the generalist produces larger numbers of eggs in sub-optimal conditions.
Some insect micropredators migrate regularly from one host to another. The hawthorn-carrot aphid overwinters on its primary host, a hawthorn tree, and migrates during the summer to its secondary host, a plant in the carrot family.


=== Host range ===
The host range is the set of hosts that a parasite can use as a partner. In the case of human parasites, the host range influences the epidemiology of the parasitism or disease.


==== Host range of viruses ====
For instance, the production of antigenic shifts in Influenza A virus can result from pigs being infected with the virus from several different hosts (such as human and bird). This co-infection provides an opportunity for mixing of the viral genes between existing strains, thereby producing a new viral strain. An influenza vaccine produced against an existing viral strain might not be effective against this new strain, which then requires a new influenza vaccine to be prepared for the protection of the human population.


== Non-parasitic associations ==


=== Mutualistic hosts ===

Some hosts participate in fully mutualistic interactions with both organisms being completely dependent on the other. For example, termites are hosts to the protozoa that live in their gut and which digest cellulose, and the human gut flora is essential for efficient digestion. Many corals and other marine invertebrates house zooxanthellae, single-celled algae, in their tissues. The host provides a protected environment in a well-lit position for the algae, while benefiting itself from the nutrients produced by photosynthesis which supplement its diet. Lamellibrachia luymesi, a deep sea giant tubeworm, has an obligate mutualistic association with internal, sulfide-oxidizing, bacterial symbionts. The tubeworm extracts the chemicals that the bacteria need from the sediment, and the bacteria supply the tubeworm, which has no mouth, with nutrients. Some hermit crabs place pieces of sponge on the shell in which they are living. These grow over and eventually dissolve away the mollusc shell; the crab may not ever need to replace its abode again and is well-camouflaged by the overgrowth of sponge.
An important hosting relationship is mycorrhiza, a symbiotic association between a fungus and the roots of a vascular host plant. The fungus receives carbohydrates, the products of photosynthesis, while the plant receives phosphates and nitrogenous compounds acquired by the fungus from the soil. Over 95% of plant families have been shown to have mycorrhizal associations. Another such relationship is between leguminous plants and certain nitrogen-fixing bacteria called rhizobia that form nodules on the roots of the plant. The host supplies the bacteria with the energy needed for nitrogen fixation and the bacteria provide much of the nitrogen needed by the host. Such crops as beans, peas, chickpeas and alfalfa are able to fix nitrogen in this way, and mixing clover with grasses increases the yield of pastures.
Neurotransmitter tyramine produced by commensal Providencia bacteria, which colonize the gut of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, bypasses the requirement for its host to biosynthesise tyramine. This product is then probably converted to octopamine by the host enzyme tyramine β-hydroxylase and manipulates a host sensory decision.


=== Hosts in cleaning symbiosis ===

Hosts of many species are involved in cleaning symbiosis, both in the sea and on land, making use of smaller animals to clean them of parasites. Cleaners include fish, shrimps and birds; hosts or clients include a much wider range of fish, marine reptiles including turtles and iguanas, octopus, whales, and terrestrial mammals. The host appears to benefit from the interaction, but biologists have disputed whether this is a truly mutualistic relationship or something closer to parasitism by the cleaner.


=== Commensal hosts ===

Remoras (also called suckerfish) can swim freely but have evolved suckers that enable them to adhere to smooth surfaces, gaining a free ride (phoresis), and they spend most of their lives clinging to a host animal such as a whale, turtle or shark. However, the relationship may be mutualistic, as remoras, though not generally considered to be cleaner fish, often consume parasitic copepods: for example, these are found in the stomach contents of 70% of the common remora. Many molluscs, barnacles and polychaete worms attach themselves to the carapace of the Atlantic horseshoe crab; for some this is a convenient arrangement, but for others it is an obligate form of commensalism and they live nowhere else.


== History ==

The first host to be noticed in ancient times was human: human parasites such as hookworm are recorded from ancient Egypt from 3000 BC onwards, while in ancient Greece, the Hippocratic Corpus describes human bladder worm. The medieval Persian physician Avicenna recorded human and animal parasites including roundworms, threadworms, the Guinea worm and tapeworms. In Early Modern times, Francesco Redi recorded animal parasites, while the microscopist Antonie van Leeuwenhoek observed and illustrated the protozoan Giardia lamblia from "his own loose stools".
Hosts to mutualistic symbionts were recognised more recently, when in 1877 Albert Bernhard Frank described the mutualistic relationship between a fungus and an alga in lichens.


== See also ==
PHI-base (Pathogen-Host Interaction database)
Generalist and specialist species
Host cell protein


== References ==.
In biology, syntrophy, syntrophism, or cross-feeding (from Greek syn 'together' and trophe 'nourishment') is the cooperative interaction between at least two microbial species to degrade a single substrate. This type of biological interaction typically involves the transfer of one or more metabolic intermediates between two or more metabolically diverse microbial species living in close proximity to each other. Thus, syntrophy can be considered an obligatory interdependency and a mutualistic metabolism between different microbial species, wherein the growth of one partner depends on the nutrients, growth factors, or substrates provided by the other(s).


== Microbial syntrophy ==
Syntrophy is often used synonymously for mutualistic symbiosis especially between at least two different bacterial species. Syntrophy differs from symbiosis in a way that syntrophic relationship is primarily based on closely linked metabolic interactions to maintain thermodynamically favorable lifestyle in a given environment. Syntrophy plays an important role in a large number of microbial processes especially in oxygen limited environments, methanogenic environments and anaerobic systems. In anoxic or methanogenic environments such as wetlands, swamps, paddy fields, landfills, digestive tract of ruminants, and anerobic digesters syntrophy is employed to overcome the energy constraints as the reactions in these environments proceed close to thermodynamic equilibrium.


=== Mechanism of microbial syntrophy ===
The main mechanism of syntrophy is removing the metabolic end products of one species so as to create an energetically favorable environment for another species. This obligate metabolic cooperation is required to facilitate the degradation of complex organic substrates under anaerobic conditions. Complex organic compounds such as ethanol, propionate, butyrate, and lactate cannot be directly used as substrates for methanogenesis by methanogens. On the other hand, fermentation of these organic compounds cannot occur in fermenting microorganisms unless the hydrogen concentration is reduced to a low level by the methanogens. The key mechanism that ensures the success of syntrophy is interspecies electron transfer. The interspecies electron transfer can be carried out via three ways: interspecies hydrogen transfer, interspecies formate transfer and interspecies direct electron transfer. Reverse electron transport is prominent in syntrophic metabolism.
The metabolic reactions and the energy involved for syntrophic degradation with H2 consumption:
A classical syntrophic relationship can be illustrated by the activity of Methanobacillus omelianskii. It was isolated several times from anaerobic sediments and sewage sludge and was regarded as a pure culture of an anaerobe converting ethanol to acetate and methane. In fact, however, the culture turned out to consist of a methanogenic archaeon "organism M.o.H" and a Gram-negative Bacterium "Organism S" which involves the oxidization of ethanol into acetate and methane mediated by interspecies hydrogen transfer. Individuals of organism S are observed as obligate anaerobic bacteria that use ethanol as an electron donor, whereas M.o.H  are methanogens that oxidize hydrogen gas to produce methane.
Organism S: 2 Ethanol + 2 H2O → 2 Acetate− + 2 H+ + 4 H2 (ΔG°' = +9.6 kJ per reaction)
Strain M.o.H.: 4 H2 + CO2 → Methane + 2 H2O (ΔG°' = -131 kJ per reaction)
Co-culture: 2 Ethanol + CO2 → 2 Acetate− + 2 H+ + Methane (ΔG°' = -113 kJ per reaction)
The oxidization of ethanol by organism S is made possible thanks to the methanogen M.o.H, which consumes the hydrogen produced by organism S, by turning the positive Gibbs free energy into negative Gibbs free energy. This situation favors growth of organism S and also provides energy for methanogens by consuming hydrogen. Down the line, acetate accumulation is also prevented by similar syntrophic relationship. Syntrophic degradation of substrates like butyrate and benzoate can also happen without hydrogen consumption.
An example of propionate and butyrate degradation with interspecies formate transfer carried out by the mutual system of Syntrophomonas wolfei and Methanobacterium formicicum:

Propionate + 2H2O + 2CO2 → Acetate− + 3Formate− + 3H+ (ΔG°'=+65.3 kJ/mol)
Butyrate + 2H2O + 2CO2 → 2Acetate- + 3Formate- + 3H+  (ΔG°'=+38.5 kJ/mol)
Direct interspecies electron transfer (DIET) which involves electron transfer without any electron carrier such as H2 or formate was reported in the co-culture system of Geobacter mettalireducens and Methanosaeto or Methanosarcina


== Examples ==


=== In ruminants ===
The defining feature of ruminants, such as cows and goats, is a stomach called a rumen. The rumen contains billions of microbes, many of which are syntrophic. Some anaerobic fermenting microbes in the rumen (and other gastrointestinal tracts) are capable of degrading organic matter to short chain fatty acids, and hydrogen. The accumulating hydrogen inhibits the microbe's ability to continue degrading organic matter, but the presence of syntrophic hydrogen-consuming microbes allows continued growth by metabolizing the waste products. In addition, fermentative bacteria gain maximum energy yield when protons are used as electron acceptor with concurrent H2 production. Hydrogen-consuming organisms include methanogens, sulfate-reducers, acetogens, and others.
Some fermentation products, such as fatty acids longer than two carbon atoms, alcohols longer than one carbon atom, and branched chain and aromatic fatty acids, cannot directly be used in methanogenesis. In acetogenesis processes, these products are oxidized to acetate and H2 by obligated proton reducing bacteria in syntrophic relationship with methanogenic archaea as low H2 partial pressure is essential for acetogenic reactions to be thermodynamically favorable (ΔG < 0).


=== Biodegradation of pollutants ===
Syntrophic microbial food webs play an integral role in bioremediation especially in environments contaminated with crude oil and petrol. Environmental contamination with oil is of high ecological importance and can be effectively mediated through syntrophic degradation by complete mineralization of alkane, aliphatic and hydrocarbon chains. The hydrocarbons of the oil are broken down after activation by fumarate, a chemical compound that is regenerated by other microorganisms. Without regeneration, the microbes degrading the oil would eventually run out of fumarate and the process would cease. This breakdown is crucial in the processes of bioremediation and global carbon cycling.
Syntrophic microbial communities are key players in the breakdown of aromatic compounds, which are common pollutants. The degradation of aromatic benzoate to methane produces intermediate compounds such as formate, acetate, CO2 and H2. The buildup of these products makes benzoate degradation thermodynamically unfavorable. These intermediates can be metabolized syntrophically by methanogens and makes the degradation process thermodynamically favorable


=== Degradation of amino acids ===
Studies have shown that bacterial degradation of amino acids can be significantly enhanced through the process of syntrophy. Microbes growing poorly on amino acid substrates alanine, aspartate, serine, leucine, valine, and glycine can have their rate of growth dramatically increased by syntrophic H2 scavengers. These scavengers, like Methanospirillum and Acetobacterium, metabolize the H2 waste produced during amino acid breakdown, preventing a toxic build-up. Another way to improve amino acid breakdown is through interspecies electron transfer mediated by formate. Species like Desulfovibrio employ this method. Amino acid fermenting anaerobes such as Clostridium species, Peptostreptococcus asacchaarolyticus, Acidaminococcus fermentans were known to breakdown amino acids like glutamate with the help of hydrogen scavenging methanogenic partners without going through the usual Stickland fermentation pathway


=== Anaerobic digestion ===
Effective syntrophic cooperation between propionate oxidizing bacteria, acetate oxidizing bacteria and H2/acetate consuming methanogens is necessary to successfully carryout anaerobic digestion to produce biomethane


== Syntrophic theories of eukaryogenesis ==
Many symbiogenetic models of eukaryogenesis propose that the first eukaryotic cells were derived from endosymbiosis facilitated by microbial syntrophy between prokaryotic cells. Most of these models involve an archaeon and an alphaproteobacterium, where the dependence of the archaeon on the alphaproteobacterium leads the former to engulf the latter, the alphaproteobacterium then eventually becoming the mitochondria. While these models share the concept of syntrophic interaction as a key driver of endosymbiosis, they often differ on the exact nature of the metabolic interactions involved and the mechanisms by which eukaryogenesis occurred. 


=== Hydrogen hypothesis ===
In 1998, William F. Martin and Miklós Müller introduced the hydrogen hypothesis, proposing that eukaryotes arose from syntrophic associations based on the transfer of H2. In this model, an syntrophic association arose where a anaerobic autotrophic methanogenic archaeon was dependent on the H2 made as a byproduct of anaerobic respiration by a facultatively anaerobic alphaproteobacterium. This syntrophy led the alphaproteobacterium to become an endosymbiont of the archaeon, serving as the precursor to the mitochondria.


=== Dennis Searcy model ===
Dennis Searcy proposed that the precursors to mitochondria were parasitic bacteria that developed a syntrophy with their hosts based upon the transfer of organic acids, H2 transfer, and the reciprocal exchange of sulfur compounds.


=== Reverse flow model ===
The reverse flow model was created based on the metabolic analysis of Asgard archaea, which is thought to be the kingdom from which eukaryotes emerged. This model proposes that a syntrophic association arose where anaerobic ancestral Asgard archaea generated and provided reducing equivalents that facultative anaerobic alphaproteobacteria used in the form of H2, small reduced compounds, or by direct electron transfer.


=== Entangle-Engulf-Endogenize model ===
The Entangle-Engulf-Endogenize (E3) model was created in 2020 based on the isolation of syntrophic archaea from deep sea marine sediment. Unlike most other symbiogenetic models, the E3 model involves three separate types of microbes: a fermentative archaeon, a facultatively aerobic organotroph (which was acts as the precursor of the mitochondria), and sulfur-reducing bacteria (SRB). This model proposes that, originally, the fermentative archaeon may have degraded amino acids via syntrophic association with SRB and the facultatively aerobic organotroph. As oxygen levels began to rise, however, the interaction with the facultatively aerobic organotroph (which is thought to have made the archaeon more aerotolerant) became stronger became stronger until it was engulfed (a process facilitated by syntrophic interaction with SRB). Additionally, the E3 model suggests that, instead of phagocytizing the facultatively aerobic organotroph, the archaeon used extracellular structures to enhance interactions and engulf the facultatively aerobic organotroph.


=== Syntrophy hypothesis ===
The syntrophy hypothesis was proposed in 2001 by researchers Purificación López-García and David Moreira before being refined in 2020 by the same researchers. Similarly to the E3 model, the syntrophy hypothesis suggests that eukaryogenesis involved three different types of microbes: a complex sulfate-reducing deltaproteobacterium (the precursor to the cytoplasm), an H2-producing Asgard archaeon (the precursor to the nucleus), and a facultatively aerobic sulfide-oxidizing alphaproteobacterium (the precursor to mitochondria). In this model, the deltaproteobacteria forms syntrophic associations with both the Asgard archaeon (based on the transfer of H2) and the alphaproteobacterium (based on the redox of sulfur), leading both to become endosymbionts of the deltaproteobacteria. In this now obligatory symbiosis, organic compounds were degraded in the periplasmic space of the deltaproteobacteria before being moved to the archaeon for further degradation. This interaction drove the periplasm to develop and expand in close proximity with the archaeon to facilitate molecular exchange, resulting in an endomembrane system, transport channels, and the loss of the archaeal membrane. Ultimately, the archaeon became the nucleus while the periplasmic endomembrane system became the endoplasmic reticulum. Meanwhile, the consortium lost the metabolic capability for bacterial sulfate reduction and archaeal energy metabolism as it became more reliant on aerobic respiration performed by the alphaproteobacterium which, ultimately, became the mitochondrion.


== Examples of syntrophic organisms ==
Syntrophomonas wolfei is a gram-negative, anaerobic, fatty-acid oxidizing bacterium that forms syntrophic associations with H2-using bacteria.
Syntrophobacter fumaroxidans is a gram-negative anaerobic bacterium that can oxidize propionate in pure cultures or in syntrophic association with Methanospirillum hungateii.
Pelotomaculum thermopropionicum is a thermophilic, anaerobic, syntrophic propionate-oxidizing bacterium that, in co-culture with Methanothermobacter thermautotrophicus, can grow on propionate, ethanol, lactate, 1-butanol, 1-pentanol, 1,3-propanediol, 1-propanol, and ethylene glycol.
Syntrophus aciditrophicus is a gram-negative, obligately anaerobic, nonmotile, rod-shaped bacterium that, in syntrophic association with hydrogen/formate-using methanogens or sulfate reducers, degrades benzoate and fatty acids.
Syntrophus buswellii is a gram-negative, anaerobic, motile, rod-shaped bacterium that, in syntrophic association with H2-using bacteria, degrades benzoate.
Syntrophus gentianae is a obligately anaerobic bacterium that ferments benzoate in syntrophic association with H2-using bacteria.


