Legal risk as a subset of operational risk that comprises the uncertainty associated with a business becoming a subjects of legal liability and obligations as a result of its operation.
One of the primary reasons why legal risk is associated with operational risk involves fraud since it is recognized as the most significant category of operational loss events and considered to be a legal issue as well. This, however, does not mean that legal risk is only confined to this conceptualization. For instance, there are specific sets of legal risks that are defined by European Union (EU) Law. In 2005, the European Central Bank declared that it will develop its own legal risk definition to help "facilitate proper risk assessment and risk management, as well as ensure a consistent approach between EU credit institutions."
Further developing legitimate risk the board for any organization does not require many steps. This process won't prevent each lawsuit or administrative punishment, however, it can reduce lawful risks and enhance the organization's responses.
Hazard is intrinsic in any business undertaking, and great danger management is a fundamental part of maintaining a fruitful business. An organization's management has shifting degrees of control concerning hazards. A few dangers can be straightforwardly overseen; different dangers are largely outside the ability to control organization management. Everything an organization can manage is to attempt to expect potential dangers, survey the possible effect on the organization's business, and be ready with an arrangement to respond to unfavorable occasions.


== Definitions ==
There is no standard definition, but there are at least two primary/secondary definition sets in circulation.
McCormick, R. 2004
Legal risk is the risk of loss to an institution which is primarily caused by:(a) a defective transaction; or(b) a claim (including a defense to a claim or a counterclaim) being made or some other event occurring which results in a liability for the institution or other loss (for example, as a result of the termination of a contract) or;(c) failing to take appropriate measures to protect assets (for example, intellectual property) owned by the institution; or(d) change in law.
McCormick, R. 2004
Management of legal risk is not a precise science and subjective to the situation of the institution, and primarily caused by the lack of proper communication channel, undefined institutional objectives (such as the lack of policies and regulations), unclarified information flow between different personnel and department, lack of delegation of power to specify task on mitigation of risks.

Johnson & Swanson. 2007
The expenses of litigation of a company.

Whalley, M. 2016
Legal risk is the risk of financial or reputational loss that can result from lack of awareness or misunderstanding of, ambiguity in, or reckless indifference to, the way law and regulation apply to your business, its relationships, processes, products and services.

Tsui TC. 2013
The cost and loss of income caused by legal uncertainty, multiplied by possibility of the individual event or legal environment as a whole. One of the most obvious legal risks of doing business not mentioned in the above definitions is the risk of arrest and prosecution.


== Types ==
Regulatory Risks turning into legal risks: These are the risks that arise out of regulations and laws that govern a business organization or the market in which it operates. Every country and the government lays down certain laws and regulations for the proper operations of the businesses. And all the businesses have to comply with those rules and regulations of the land. Moreover, any non-compliance can have serious consequences for any organization. Therefore legal expenses insurance may be used to mitigate this risk.
Compliance Risk: The potential for fines and penalties for an organization that fails to comply with laws regulations.
Contract Risk: The potential for a partner, customer or supplier to fail to meet the terms of a contract resulting in losses. Contract risk can also result from the failure to meet the terms of a contract resulting in penalties or legal disputes.
Non-contractual Rights: The potential for a third party to infringe on its non-contractual obligations.
Dispute Risk: The potential for a legal dispute to arise as a result of business activities.
Reputational risk: The potential of the decline of reputation due to legal actions.


== Consequences ==
Legal risk can lead to fines and administrative penalties, the need for monetary damages, deterioration of reputation, deterioration of the bank's market position, narrowing opportunities for development, reducing the opportunities for development or legal enforcement of agreements.


== References ==.
Biolaw is an area of law that addresses the intersection of law and the biosciences. Biolaw addresses topics from CRISPR to genetic engineering to the patenting of new forms of life to de-extinction law. The Association of American Law Schools has had a chartered section on biolaw since 2010.
The field of biolaw has been of growing importance in the last several years with the rise of legal issues such as those surrounding biohacking, reproduction, surrogacy, and de-extinction.


== Academic Venues ==
The field of biolaw has several academic venues associated with it.  Two conferences were held in the Fall of 2007: one was hosted by Jim Chen at Brandeis Law School (“Law and the Biosciences”) and another by Professor Andrew W. Torrance  at the University of Kansas School of Law (the “Biolaw Conference”).  Torrance then hosted the Biolaw Conference annually until 2011.  Professor Hank Greely, who was an invited speaker at the first Biolaw Conference, Torrance, and Professors I. Glenn Cohen and Nita Farahany then cofounded the annual Bio Lawlapalooza, holding it first in the Spring of 2017, and annually after that, though the 2020 and 2021 meetings were canceled due to the Covid-19 pandemic.


== References ==.
Medieval law was the law in force in Europe from the final phases of Roman law, coinciding with the disintegration of the Western Roman Empire in the 5th century, until the beginning of the early modern period, around the 15th-16th century, a period that traditional historiography identifies as the Middle Ages. Legal historians have emphasized how this legal experience was distinguished by certain peculiar features, to the point that it has been defined as "a new legal mentality embodied in a harmonious complex of behaviors, rules, and reflections, with its own distinctly characteristic profile".
With the consolidation of the barbarian kingdoms, an order characterized by the personality of law emerged: the subjected Latin populations were allowed to retain the ancient Roman law, while relations within the community of the ruling barbarians were regulated by their own law. Although Germanic law was largely customary in nature and transmitted orally, some rulers nevertheless sought to record the legal tradition of their people in writing; however, such compilations neither had nor sought to have a universal character, dealing mainly with criminal and family law, and leaving ample room for ancient customs in matters not addressed. The absence of a central power intent on holding a monopoly over legal production was one of the aspects that most strongly influenced the entire history of medieval law. Among the most important compilations of law of the Early Middle Ages are the Lex Burgundionum, commissioned by Gundobad at the beginning of the 6th century, the Edictum of the king of the Goths Theodoric the Great, the Edict of Rothari promulgated by the Lombard king Rothari in 643, and the various capitularies issued by the Frankish rulers. Separate mention should be made of the monastic rules, one of the most characteristic forms of early medieval legal production.
After the year 1000, Europe experienced a period of cultural and economic revival. In order to respond to the new needs of an increasingly complex society, there was a rediscovery of Roman law, ancient yet technically sophisticated. The texts collected in the Corpus iuris civilis of Justinian were reconstructed and studied by the school of the glossators, initiated by Irnerius in Bologna around the beginning of the 12th century. From this point onward, a class of learned jurists trained in law schools increasingly came to prominence; these would give rise to the medieval universities and to the elaboration of a new legal system, common law, destined to spread throughout Europe. Among the most significant figures of the new system was the notary, from whose activities important legal institutions emerged, sometimes drawn from Roman law but at other times the result of autonomous elaborations, intended to regulate the many aspects of practical life: commerce, navigation, the organization of the free communes, and so forth. Particularly notable was the development of canon law, achieved through the compilation of sources and the production of glosses, including the famous Decretum Gratiani of the mid-12th century. The system of "common law", in Latin ius commune, came to coexist, and at times to clash, with the law produced by authorities, the ius proprium; however, it did so "leaving to the jurist the task of elaborating an underlying framework capable of giving unitary coherence to such multiplicity". Only with the early modern period and the affirmation of the nation-states would central authority acquire full control over the production and administration of law, bringing the experience of medieval law to an end and ushering in the modern one.


== Introduction: periodization and characteristics ==
The beginning of medieval law can be identified with the progressive decline, which began toward the end of the 4th century, of the Western Roman Empire and its refined and complex legal institutions, culminating, according to traditional historiography, with the deposition of the last Western emperor Romulus Augustulus by the barbarian Odoacer in 476. The subsequent roughly 1,000 years, commonly referred to as the Middle Ages, saw in Europe the succession of various forms of government, from the Roman–barbarian kingdoms to the Carolingian Empire, to feudalism, to medieval communes, to principalities and lordships, without forgetting the complex constitution of the Holy Roman Empire; all these systems, however, shared a lack of sovereignty, typical of the previous Roman experience and of later modern states, which was reflected in a relative disinterest in the production of law. It was thus that different legal systems gradually emerged, initially the result of customary consolidations and later through the work of learned jurists.
Traditionally, the Middle Ages are divided into the Early Middle Ages and the Late Middle Ages, whose temporal boundaries are not unambiguously defined: for Italy, the 11th century is usually assumed as the dividing line, while for regions of Northern Europe this period shifts forward by a couple of centuries. Despite these uncertainties, this article follows the Italian historiographical tradition while keeping in mind that it is primarily a "convenient" division and does not correspond to a substantial change in the medieval legal experience, which, according to many historians, such as Paolo Grossi, remains consistent in its most peculiar characteristics until the end of the Middle Ages. However, Grossi himself speaks of an «officina della prassi» (workshop of practice) regarding the early-medieval period, in relation to the frequent recourse to custom by the jurists of the time, and a «laboratorio sapienziale» (sapiential laboratory) for the late-medieval period, characterized by cities and trade, where a new class of jurists developed new solutions based on existing material.
Depending on the author, the Middle Ages end around the transition between the late 15th and the early 16th century: this period can also be associated with the decline of medieval law, stifled by the rise of the nation-states, increasingly inclined to assume responsibility for legal production, and by a religious reform that definitively changed Europe following profound anthropological reflection developed over more than two centuries within the Western Christian society of the time.


== Christian Roman Law between the 4th and 5th centuries: the first codifications ==


=== Crisis of classical Roman law and the rise of codification ===
From the mid-3rd century, the Roman Empire was in a deteriorating political and economic situation due to a succession of civil wars and the continuous invasions of neighboring peoples. In this scenario, the traditional institutions of the republican constitution were definitively abandoned by the absolute monarchy of the Dominate. At the same time, the ancient system of Roman law also went into crisis, with the gradual abandonment of the multiple legislative sources that characterized it, as Gaius had listed in his Institutes, and the disappearance of the class of jurists who considered law as a science, in favor of a single predominant source consisting of decisions of central authority in the form of edicts and rescripts.
Soon, the multitude of such edicts and the vastness and complexity reached by the empire had created various problems of legislative uncertainty within it, and therefore among the jurists of the time, the need arose to have a single rational collection of laws. This led to the compilation of "codes", which, however, should not be compared to the Enlightenment codification born in the 18th century, since they were not laws newly written into a single normative text, but rather collections of ancient laws, adapted with interpolations, harmonizations, and the addition of few novelties.Padoa-Schioppa 2007, pp. 20–21.


=== Imperial law codes ===
An early example in this regard was the Gregorian Code, a collection of imperial constitutions compiled by private individuals around 292–293, which included all rescripts issued from the reign of Hadrian (117–138) to about the middle of Diocletian's reign (284–305). This was followed a few years later by the Hermogenian Code, composed mainly of rescripts organized according to the rubrics of the Gregorian. Over a century later, in 438, Emperor Theodosius II promulgated, after nearly a decade of work, the Theodosian Code, the first official collection of laws of the Empire. In this monumental work, composed of 16 books, were also included the tracts of jurists from the classical period and the responsa prudentium. Initially, it was intended to include also laws no longer in force for didactic purposes, but this was not implemented. The Theodosian Code was a landmark event, as it was the first code enacted by an emperor and made legally binding through a novella. Its influence was such that it shaped Western law well beyond the year 1000. However, despite being at the time the main sources for knowledge of Roman law, the three aforementioned codifications «with their narrow purposes and their elementary and roughly imperfect structures [...] were the faithful mirror of a decaying world».


=== Formation of canon law ===
Parallel to the codification of Roman law, a systematic collection of rules concerning the Christian Church also began, leading to the formation of the canon law system. Already in 313, Emperors Constantine I and Licinius had signed a treaty recognizing freedom of worship within the Empire and restoring to Christians the places, goods, and possessions previously acquired, requisitioned, or taken during the long period of persecutions. These provisions are considered the starting point from which the inalienability of ecclesiastical property would develop, which in the following centuries would make church possessions "untouchable." When Constantine I became sole emperor in 324, he further impressed his pro-Christian orientation on law: for example, manumissions of slaves were facilitated, limits were imposed on divorce, and male and female children were equated regarding inheritance mortis causa.
In 380, thanks to the Edict of Thessalonica, Christianity became the sole mandatory religion of the State, leading to significant legal consequences. By the 5th century, a debate had begun over who, between the pope and the emperor, held supreme authority over the Christian population, with Pope Gelasius I theorizing in a letter to Emperor Anastasius I Dicorus that the world was governed by two supreme authorities, without claiming papal superiority over political power—a development that would occur only during the 11th century. Driven by these debates, Gelasius's pontificate was marked by a prolific production of canon law compilations, such as the Collectio Quesnelliana and the Collectio Dionysiana compiled by the monk Dionysius. In the latter, which would be used for centuries, were included both the canons promulgated by various councils and the decretals issued by the popes. Despite these codification efforts, the Christian Church appeared far from unified, and autonomous codes had emerged in various regions. The most important of these was undoubtedly the Collectio Hispana, which drew from the Dionysiana and included additional local conciliar decisions.


== Law in the Early Middle Ages ==


=== Law in the Romano-barbarian kingdoms ===
See also Germanic law

Traditionally, the deposition of the emperor Romulus Augustulus, which occurred in 476, is considered to coincide with the fall of the Western Roman Empire and the establishment in its provinces of the Romano-barbarian kingdoms. These were in practice autonomous kingdoms, although formally they often remained dependent on the Eastern Roman Empire; their barbarian leaders were at the same time regents and sovereigns of their respective peoples on behalf of the monarch of Constantinople. Originally, the Germanic peoples possessed a form of law based mainly on customs and which for a long time had been transmitted only orally. Each people had its own law as an integral part of its identity; moreover, there were no formal authorities or institutions that imposed it on the population, and its observance derived above all from tradition.
When the Germanic populations migrated into the Empire, at least initially, they refused to adopt Roman law, although they did not wish to impose their own law either. In this way, a system based on the personality of law was formed: the Roman population subjected to them was allowed to maintain its own laws in private relations, while the members of the conquering people followed a law of their own. In practice, several legal systems coexisted within the same territory, applied to the respective peoples. Aware that the population of Latin tradition would never accept their ancient customs, the Germans began to produce collections of Roman laws useful for resolving practical cases. Thus began, over time, a process of assimilation of law which, however, produced different results from one people to another.

The Visigoths, originating from Scythia and Dacia, first settled in the region of Gaul and later in what is now southern Spain. In 506, at the will of King Alaric II, the Lex Romana Visigothorum was issued, a collection of laws dedicated to the subjected Latin population, which stood alongside the Code of Euric, intended instead to regulate relations among members of the Visigothic people, in accordance with the principle of personality of law. The respect of the Visigoths for Roman law is nevertheless well attested by the fact that the Lex Romana Visigothorum was essentially a compendium of the Theodosian Code. The system of two distinct legal orders remained in force until the reign of Chindasuinth, who had a code drawn up valid for all his subjects (principle of the territoriality of law) and which was promulgated between 642 and 643; the Visigothic Code remained in force until the Islamic conquest of the Iberian Peninsula in the early years of the 8th century.
Already in the early years of the 5th century the Burgundians had moved into what is now Burgundy, founding the kingdom of the same name. As with the Visigoths, two different legal systems coexisted in this case as well: the Lex Romana Burgundionum, consisting of principles of Roman law reworked and simplified, applied only to Roman citizens present in the kingdom; the Lex Burgundionum, a unitary code composed of 46 books, was intended for the Burgundians with the aim of facilitating their adoption of written norms, as they were still accustomed to following ancient customs. The issuance of the two codes in the early years of the 6th century was due to King Gundobad.

Among the Franks the law appeared even more fragmented, as they were in turn divided into different ethnic groups governed by different laws transmitted orally as customs. Their king Clovis I converted, the first among all Germanic leaders, to Christianity in 496, thus favoring integration between Franks and the Roman population. Thanks to him the Salic law was also issued, which introduced monetary penalties for certain blood crimes in order to avoid dangerous feuds between families. The new legislation also included the ancient institution of trustis, which later evolved into vassalage. Clovis drew inspiration from the Roman model with regard to the administrative organization of his kingdom, which was divided among dukes and counts.
In 493, Theodoric the Great, at the head of the Ostrogoths, defeated Odoacer, completing the conquest of the Italian peninsula. His government was centered on a profound dualism between the Ostrogothic people and the Latin-Roman population: military command passed entirely into the hands of the new conquerors, who remained of Arian religion, and social structures also remained clearly distinct. In matters of law there was no substantial integration, with the Ostrogoths continuing to observe their own legal traditions; nevertheless, the Edictum Theodorici Regis promulgated by Theodoric toward the end of his reign certainly drew inspiration from the principal Roman legal institutions and, among its aims, sought to create instruments suitable for settling disputes between Ostrogoths and Latins.


=== The legislative work of Justinian ===
See also Corpus iuris civilis

In 527 Justinian I ascended to the imperial throne of Constantinople, strengthening the government through a centralizing policy in which the figure of the Emperor assumed increasingly theocratic and caesaropapist connotations. In addition to his military enterprises of restauratio imperii and the great architectural works, Justinian is remembered for having promoted intense legislative activity which culminated in the commission given to the court jurists, led by Tribonian, to reorganize and rework the law in force, giving rise, after five years of work (from 529 to 534), to an imposing unitary work later known as the Corpus iuris civilis. The commission responsible for its creation made extensive use of ancient texts, particularly those of classical Roman law, subjecting them, however, to modernization and to [[
Interpolation (manuscripts)|interpolation]].

Having become the sole source of law in the Empire, the Corpus iuris civilis was itself composed of four texts: the Institutiones, a didactic work in four books intended for those studying law on the model of the Institutes of Gaius; the Digest (or Pandectae), an anthology in fifty books (two of which, called terribiles, dedicated to criminal law) of fragments extracted (not without modifications) from the works of the most eminent jurists in the history of Rome; the Codex, a collection of imperial constitutions from Hadrian to Justinian himself; finally, the Novellae Constitutiones, a collection of the constitutions issued by Justinian after the publication of the Codex, until his death.
The work reveals the existence of a civil law, proper to each individual, and of a natural law, common to all human beings; the latter was not "static" but had to be continually discovered and recreated following critical reflections also based on Christian doctrine. Law is thus seen not only as a series of provisions given by authority, but as a phenomenon in continuous elaboration, adapted to the various needs of communal life.
Initially intended for use in the East, at the request of Pope Vigilius Justinian had the use of the Corpus extended also to part of the West, recently reconquered after a war against the Goths, as he ordered in the pragmatic sanction pro petitione Vigilii. However, the subsequent invasion of the Lombards did not allow a substantial diffusion of the text, which fell into disuse, also because of its complexity, with the exception of the Italian regions where the Byzantines managed to resist the pressures of the Germanic invaders. Rediscovered around the second half of the 11th century, the legislative work promoted by Justinian, which had closed the millennial history of Roman law, subsequently represented for centuries the basis of the European common law until the beginning of the 19th century, when it was considered superseded by the Napoleonic Code which constituted «the solution of continuity [...] replacing, in place of the free interpretatio of jurists as sources of law, a system codified by the authority of the State». Nevertheless, the use in modernized form of the Corpus continued until the dawn of the nineteenth century and, thanks to German Pandectists, it contributed to the «birth of the modern conceptual and interpretative categories of private law throughout the world».


=== The monastic regulae ===


=== The Lombards and the Edict of Rothari ===


=== Law in the Carolingian Age ===


=== Feudalism and Autonomies ===


=== Law in Anglo-Saxon England ===


== Law in the Late Middle Ages ==


== Transition to the Early Modern Age ==


== References ==


== Bibliography ==.
Civil law is a major "branch of the law", in common law legal systems such as those in England and Wales and in the United States, where it stands in contrast to criminal law. Private law, which relates to civil wrongs and quasi-contracts, is part of civil law, as is contract law and law of property (excluding property-related crimes, such as theft or vandalism). Civil law may, like criminal law, be divided into substantive law and procedural law. Substantive law refers to the determination of how the law applies to facts, and procedural law refers to regulations on how the substantive law is administered. The rights and duties of persons (natural persons and legal persons) amongst themselves is the primary concern of civil law. The common law is today as fertile a source for theoretical inquiry as it has ever been. 
Around the English-speaking world, many scholars of law, philosophy, politics, and history study the theoretical foundations and applications of the common law. When used in the context of a common law legal system, the term civil law means that branch of the law not including criminal law.
The common law system, which originated in medieval England, is often contrasted with the civil law legal system originating in France and Italy.  Whereas the civil law takes the form of legal codes such as the Napoleonic Code, the common law comes from uncodified case law that arises as a result of judicial decisions, recognising prior court decisions as legally binding precedent. 
Civil litigation refers to legal proceedings undertaken to resolve a dispute regarding an alleged civil wrong and seeking redress or payment of damages. It includes the process of one party notifying the other that they have a cause for action. It is often suggested that civil litigation proceedings are undertaken for the purpose of obtaining compensation for injury, and may thus be distinguished from criminal proceedings, whose purpose is to inflict punishment. However, exemplary damages or punitive damages may be awarded in civil proceedings. It was also formerly possible for common informers to sue for a penalty in civil proceedings.
Because some courts have both a civil and criminal jurisdiction, civil proceedings cannot be defined as those taken in civil courts. In the United States, the expression "civil courts" is used as a shorthand for "trial courts in civil cases".
In England and other common-law countries, the burden of proof in civil proceedings is, in general—with a number of exceptions such as committal proceedings for civil contempt—proof on a balance of probabilities. In civil cases in the law of the Maldives, the burden of proof requires the plaintiff to convince the court of the plaintiff's entitlement to the relief sought. This means that the plaintiff must prove each element of the claim, or cause of action in order to recover.
The cost of pursuing civil litigation has sometimes been highlighted as excessive relative to the scale of the issue to be resolved. Where costs are too high, they can restrict access to justice.


== See also ==
Outline of civil law (common law)
Civil code
Administrative law
Federal law
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure
Natural law


== References ==.
The legal age of consent for sexual activity varies by jurisdiction across Asia. The specific activity engaged in or the gender of participants can also be relevant factors. Below is a discussion of the various laws dealing with this subject. The highlighted age refers to an age at or above which an individual can engage in unfettered sexual relations with another who is also at or above that age. Other variables, such as homosexual relations or close in age exceptions, may exist, and are noted when relevant. 
The unrestricted age of consent is the legal age from which one is deemed able to consent to having sex with anyone else at or above the age of consent, or the marriageable age if they must be married. The lowest unrestricted age of consent in Asia is the onset of puberty, though this is only the case in Afghanistan. The highest unrestricted age of consent is 21, though this age of consent is only the case in Bahrain and the specific instance of females receiving anal sex in Hong Kong. Disregarding these exceptions, the unrestricted ages of consent in Asia range between 13 and 18.


== Summary ==
All jurisdictions in Asia per List of sovereign states and dependent territories in Asia:


=== Definitions ===

Restricted by age difference: younger partner is deemed able to consent to having sex with an older one as long as their age difference does not exceed a specified amount. This column shows the younger partner's age of consent under these rules, not the age difference.
Restricted by authority: younger partner is deemed able to consent to having sex with any older partner, so long as said older partner is not in a legally recognised position of trust or authority, which the latter is abusing over the former.
Unrestricted: age from which one is deemed able to consent to having sex with anyone else at or above the age of consent or the marriageable age if they must be married.


=== Table ===


== Afghanistan ==
Sexual activity outside marriage is illegal in Afghanistan. According to the Ministry for the Propagation of Virtue and the Prevention of Vice, marriage is allowed at puberty.


== Armenia ==
The age of consent in Armenia is 16.
"Article 141. Sexual acts with a person under 16.
Sexual intercourse or other sexual acts with a person obviously under 16, by a person who reached 18 years of age, in the absence of elements of crime envisaged in Articles 138, 139 or 140 of this Code, is punished with correctional labor for the term of up to 2 years, or with imprisonment for the term of up to 2 years."


== Azerbaijan ==
The age of consent in Azerbaijan is 16.
"Article 152
Sexual intercourse with the person below the age of 16 years, as well as the same offences linked with satisfaction of sexual passion in perverted forms shall be punished by imprisonment up to 3 years."


== Bahrain ==
Consensual sex outside of marriage is legally permissible for those aged 21 and above, regardless of gender and/or sexual orientation. If a married individual has sex with somebody they are not married to, the person they are married to is given the liberty, by the criminal procedure code, to file for an 'adultery' charge if they wanted to. They are also given the liberty to drop off the charge after filing it if they wanted to. However, the mentioned options would not be available after three months are passed from when the person learned about the adultery. The marriage of course should be recognized by the government for the mentioned options to be provided.
The marriageable age is 16 years for females, and 18 for males.  Before this age, marriage requires authorization from the Shariah Court of the State of Bahrain. The minimum age to marry without permission from the girl's father or legal guardian is 18 years.
Rape is punished by imprisonment. Since 1986, the penalty is either life imprisonment or possibly the death penalty for victims under 16. Non-consent is assumed for unmarried women under 14. According to article 349 of the updated penal code, the death penalty for the rapist is eligible only if the rape causes death for the sexually assaulted female.
The law presumes non-consent of male victims less than 14 too. There is a prison sentence (maximum 10 years) for male victims under 16 (article 346) while article 347 gives an unspecified prison sentence with consenting male victims under 21.


== Bangladesh ==
According to section 9 (1) of the Women and Child Abuse Prevention Act, 2003, it is defined as rape to have sexual intercourse with a woman with or without her consent, when she is under 14 years of age.

Article 375 specifies that “A man is said to commit "rape" who except in the case hereinafter excepted, has sexual intercourse with a woman With or without her consent, when she is under fourteen years of age. (Exception) Sexual intercourse by a man with his wife, the wife not being under thirteen years of age, is not rape.


== Bhutan ==
The age of consent in Bhutan is 18 regardless of gender or sexual orientation, according to Article 183 of the Penal Code of Bhutan.


== Brunei ==
Any kind of sexual activity outside of a heterosexual marriage is illegal in Brunei. The minimum age for marriage is 16.
Article 2 of this Act determines the offence as follows:
Any person who has or attempts to have carnal knowledge (sexual intercourse) of a girl under the age of sixteen (16) years except by way of marriage, shall be guilty of an offense: Penalty, imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 2 years and not more than 7 years and to whipping not exceeding 24 strokes of the rattan in the case of an adult or 12 strokes of the rattan in the case of a youthful offender.


== Cambodia ==
The age of consent in Cambodia is 15 regardless of gender or sexual orientation. The age of consent in this country is determined by Article 8, of Chapter 4 (Debauchery) of the Law on Suppression of the Kidnapping, Trafficking, and Exploitation of Human Beings, which has been specifically enacted to prohibit sex with children under 15. The law prohibits "debauchery" with a child under 15, and this term (the original Cambodian word is anacha has been interpreted by courts to forbid any form of sexual conduct (both consensual and non-consensual; both 'ordinary' sex and paid sex) with a child under 15. This is the main legal tool used to prosecute foreigners engaging in child sex tourism in Cambodia.
Article 8 of the 'Law on Suppression of the Kidnapping, Trafficking, and Exploitation of Human Beings' states, "Any person who commits acts of debauchery involving a minor below 15 years old, even if there is consent from the concerned minor, or even if the person has bought such minor from someone else or from a pimp, shall be punished by ten (10) to twenty (20) years in prison. In case of repeat offenses, the maximum punishment term shall be applied."


== Mainland China ==
In Mainland China, the age of consent for sexual activity is 14 years, regardless of gender or sexual orientation. Chinese law defines statutory rape as having sex with a girl who is less than fourteen years of age. A five-year prison sentence and fine may result if the girl under 14 years of age was acting as a prostitute. In August 2015, the law concerning underage prostitutes was repealed. The Statutory rape law now applies to underage prostitution as well. Persons with Special Duties towards minor females who have attained the full age of 14 shall be held accountable for rape if they compel the victim engaging in sexual relations with them by taking advantage of their dominant positions or the helpless situations of the victim.
In 2020, there was a proposal to raise the age of consent in the wake of a scandal in the city of Yantai.
In 2021, there was a proposal to criminalize teachers having intercourse with students in primary and junior high levels.
As of 2026, both proposals have not been enacted.


== East Timor ==
The age of consent in East Timor is 14 regardless of gender or sexual orientation, per Article 177. However, sex acts with an adolescent aged above 14 but under 16 years of age are illegal if an adult practices them with the adolescent by "taking advantage of the inexperience" of that adolescent. (Article 178).
Article 177. Sexual abuse of a minor:

Any person who practices vaginal, anal or oral coitus with a minor aged less than 14 years is punishable with 5 to 20 years' imprisonment.
Any person who practices any act of sexual relief with a minor aged less than 14 years is punishable with 5 to 15 years' imprisonment.
Article 178. Sexual acts with an adolescent:

Any person who, being an adult and apart from situations provided in this section, practices any relevant sexual act with a minor aged between 14 and 16 years, taking advantage of the inexperience of the same, is punishable with up to 5 years' imprisonment.


== Hong Kong ==
In Hong Kong the age of consent for sexual activity is 16 regardless of gender or sexual orientation. However, the age of consent for a female receiving anal sex is 21.
Under s.124 of the Crimes Ordinance (Cap.200), a man who has unlawful sexual intercourse with a girl under the age of 16 shall be liable to imprisonment for 5 years. Under s.123 of the Crimes Ordinance, a man who has unlawful sexual intercourse with a girl under the age of 13 shall be liable to imprisonment for life.
Under s.122 of the Crimes Ordinance, a person under the age of 16 cannot in law give any consent which would prevent an act being an assault for the purposes of indecent assault. Hence, a woman who has sexual activity with a boy or a girl under 16 will be prosecuted under this section.
Under s.127 of the Crimes Ordinance, a person who takes an unmarried girl under the age of 18 out of the possession of her parent or guardian against the will of the parent or guardian with the intention that she shall have unlawful sexual intercourse with men or with a particular man shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction on indictment to imprisonment for 7 years."
The previous position regarding homosexual couples is contained in s.118C which provides that a man who commits or suffers to commit buggery with a man under the age of 21 is liable on conviction on indictment to imprisonment for life. However, this section was struck down as unconstitutional in Leung TC William Roy v Secretary for Justice. Hence, the age of consent between two males have been effectively equalized with that between a male and a female, which is 16.
Prior to 2012 there was a presumption that a male minor under 14 could not consent to sexual intercourse under any circumstances. The law was changed after a 13-year-old boy attacked a 5-year-old girl at a Chai Wan hospital ward; the prosecution was unable to convict him of rape, instead only able to do so for indecent assault. In 2015 an 11-year-old boy and a 13-year-old boy were arrested after they were found having sex with an 11-year-old girl. Under the new laws they have the possibility of having the maximum sentence of life in prison.


== India ==
India's age of consent for sex is set at 18 years under the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013, regardless of gender.
In 1892, the marital rape and subsequent death of a 10-year-old girl, Phulmoni Dasi, caused the age of consent to be raised from 10 to 12. In 1949, it was raised to 16 after agitation from women's groups about the adverse effect of early pregnancy. On 3 April 2014 the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013 came into effect, which raised the legal permissible age for sexual consent from 16 to 18. Although the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013 initially sought to lower the age to 16, it was set at 18 due to political pressure from conservative parties. Section 375 reads: A man is said to commit "rape" if he ... Sixthly – With or without her consent, when she is under eighteen years of age.


=== Legal action on marital rape ===
Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 disallows any such sexual relationships and puts such crimes within marriages as an aggravated offense. A Public Interest Litigation filled by Independent Thought, an organization working on child rights law, was heard in the Supreme Court of India for declaring the exception allowing marital rape within prohibited child marriages as unconstitutional: Independent Thought vs. Union of India [W.P(civil) 382 of 2013]. In the judgment, delivered on 11 October, the Supreme Court bench consisting of Justices Madan B. Lokur and Deepak Gupta read down Exception 2 to Section 375 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) to hold that sexual intercourse by a man with his own wife if she is below 15 years of age would amount to rape. According to Section 375 Exception, Sexual Intercourse by a man with his own wife, the wife not being under 15 years of age, is not rape.
The Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code bans "carnal intercourse against the order of nature". It was used to prosecute people for having anal or oral sex, although prosecutions were rare. The law was constitutionally challenged and subsequently read down by the Delhi High Court in 2009 for violating the human rights of sexual minorities. In 2013, the Supreme Court overturned the Delhi High Court's judgment, recriminalizing homosexuality. However, in 2018, the Supreme Court, on hearing a fresh batch of petitions, declared some parts of the law unconstitutional on the issue, setting the age of consent for consensual homosexual sex at 18, same age for consensual heterosexual sex.


== Indonesia ==
According to Article 415 of Penal Code Act 2023, the age of consent in Indonesia is 18 years old, regardless of gender. Individuals younger than 18 years old in Indonesia were illegal to consent of sexual activity, and such activity may result in prosecution for statutory rape or the equivalent local law.
Under Article 415, an individual can be sentenced to up to nine years in prison imprisonment for engaging in sexual activity with a child. Meanwhile, under Article 416 paragraph (1) provides a higher penalty of up to twelve years' imprisonment if the act causes serious injury, while paragraph (2) provides for a sentence of up to fifteen years' imprisonment if it results in death. 
This interpretation is based on Article 415 section (b), which criminalizes committing an obscene act with a person known or reasonably suspected to be a child. The definition of a child is provided in Article 150, which states that a child is any person under 18 years of age.
According to Article 411 and 412, premarital sex and extramarital sex between adults are illegal sexual activities, but enforcement requires a complaint from a member of the nuclear family for punishment to be applied. An exception applies in Aceh, where such sexual activity is regulated under regional Sharia law and may be prosecuted without a complaint.


== Iran ==
Sex outside of marriage is illegal in Iran. The minimum age of marriage in Iran is 15 for boys and 13 for girls. Ways around these regulations include temporary marriages (Nikah mut'ah). With the permission of a court, girls may marry at a younger age.  In 2010, as many as 42,000 children aged between 10 and 14 were married, and 716 girls younger than 10 had wed. Under the Civil Code 2007, marriage “before the age of majority” is prohibited. However the age of majority is 9 lunar years (8 years and 9 months) for girls.


== Iraq ==
The age of consent in Iraq is set at 15, regardless of gender and/or sexual orientation. "Any person who sexually assaults a boy or girl under the age of 15 without the use of force, menaces or deception is punishable by detention..."
"Any person who has sexual intercourse with a female relative to the third generation under the age of 15 with her consent and the offence leads to her death, to pregnancy or loss of virginity [is punishable by jail]."
Attempts were made by conservative parties in the Iraqi parliament to legalize child marriage in 2024. However, a revised bill was passed in January 2025 which reinstated the clauses of the previous amendment following protests in Iraq along with backlash from both international and local civil society groups. This prevented the formal recognition of child marriage in Iraqi law, ultimately keeping the age of consent at 15.


== Israel ==
According to the Israeli Penal Code of 1977 the age of consent in Israel is 16 regardless of gender or sexual orientation, for any form of sexual relations involving penetration. A special case arises when a person aged 14 or 15 had sexual relations with an older partner; in this case the older partner would be exempt of criminal liability if three conditions are met: the age difference between the partners was less than three years, the younger partner gave consent and the act was done out of "regular friendly relations" and without the abuse of power.


== Japan ==
The age of consent in Japan is 16 years old, according to Articles 176 and 177 of the Penal Code (as amended in 2023).
In the original 1907 Penal Code, the age of consent was 13 years old, which by 2023 was among the world's lowest. Article 176 ("Forcible Indecency") established a penalty of 6 months to 10 years of imprisonment for "indecent acts" with males and females under 13 years old, and Article 177 ("Rape") established a minimum sentence of 3 years for sexual intercourse with females under 13. In 2017, Article 177 was amended to specify vaginal, anal, and oral intercourse, to apply to all persons instead of females, and to increase the minimum sentence to 5 years. In 2023, the two articles were amended to raise the age of consent from 13 to 16 years old. An exception was included for sexual acts involving persons aged 13 to 15, by which the older partner is only subject to penalty if five or more years older. The amendments were part of a larger reform of Japan's sex crime legislation.
On the other hand, even before the revision of the Penal Code, several laws made it illegal to engage in sexual acts with minors under the age of 18. For example, the Child Welfare Law (ja) of 1947 prohibits the act of "causing a person under the age of 18 to engage in indecent acts (淫行, inkō)," with a maximum penalty of 10 years in prison. Under this law, a person who influences and encourages a minor to engage in indecent acts is punishable, even if the minor does so voluntarily. An array of local ordinances adopted in all 47 Japanese prefectures, known as Seishōnen Hogo Ikusei Jōrei (青少年保護育成条例; "Bylaws for Protecting and Nurturing Adolescents") forbid sexual acts judged "indecent" (淫行, inkō) between adolescents (defined as persons under 18) and adults; 12 prefectures adopted such a bylaw in the 1950s, 19 in the 1960s, 13 in the 1970s, 2 in the 1980s, and the last (Nagano Prefecture) in 2016. A 1985 decision of the Supreme Court of Japan held that the ordinances were not to be broadly interpreted as forbidding all sexual acts with adolescents, but only those "conducted by unfair means that take advantage of the juvenile's mental or physical immaturity, such as by enticing, threatening, deceiving, or confusing, as well as [acts] where the juvenile is treated merely as an object to satisfy one's own sexual desires." The Supreme Court also ruled that sexual acts within "socially accepted norms", such as within marriage, engagement, or a "similar sincere relationship", were not "indecent". As of 2004, about 1,000 offenses by adults are punished annually under these bylaws; a typical penalty is a ¥300,000 fine and a suspended sentence.


== Jordan ==
The age of consent in Jordan is set at 18 years old, regardless of gender and/or sexual orientation, according to the country's penal code.


== Kazakhstan ==
The age of consent in Kazakhstan is 16, according to article 122 of the Crime Criminal Code.
Article 122. Sexual Intercourse and Other Actions of a Sexual Character with a Person Under Sixteen Years of Age Sexual intercourse, sodomy, or lesbianism or other acts of sexual nature, with a person who did not reach sixteen years of age, the guilty party being aware of that fact, shall be punished by restriction of freedom for a period up to three years, or by detention under arrest for a period up to six months, or deprivation of freedom for a period up to five years.


== Kuwait ==
Sexual activity outside marriage is illegal in Kuwait. The marriageable age is 17 for boys, and 15 for girls.


== Kyrgyzstan ==
The age of consent in Kyrgyzstan is 16, regardless of gender or sexual orientation. This is established by Article 132 of the penal code, and only applies to offenders over age 18.
Article 133 forbids "lecherous actions" against persons below 14 committed without violence. Anyone aged 16 (the general age of criminal responsibility) or above can be punished under this section.


== Laos ==
The age of consent in Laos is 15 regardless of gender or sexual orientation. Article 129 of the Laos Penal Code provides for a penalty of 1–5 years' imprisonment and a fine of 2–5 million kip.


== Lebanon ==
The age of consent for sex in Lebanon is 18 for both males and females in regardless of gender or sexual orientation.
Article 505 of the Penal Code states, "Whoever commits a sexual act with a minor of less than fifteen (15) years, shall be punished with hard labor of up to fifteen (15) years. This penalty shall be for a minimum of five (5) years, if the victim has not attained the age of twelve (12) years. And whoever commits a sexual act with a minor aged more than fifteen (15) to years but less than eighteen (18) years, shall be punished by imprisonment for a period varying between 2 months and 2 years."
According to Lebanese Marital Law, individuals aged between 15 (14 in the case of females with judicial consent) and 18, may  marry in exceptional cases (when factoring in areas of the law, such as and including both parental and judicial consent), and in the cases of females – marriage is allowed outright, as an unrestricted right, from the age of 17. However it is unclear, as to what extent sex within the confines of marriage impacts on the general age of consent.


== Macau ==
The general age of consent in Macau is 14, regardless of gender or sexual orientation, provided that the older participant did not abuse the inexperience of a person aged 14 or 15. 
Otherwise the general age of consent is 16 years of age (except in specific cases where an individual aged 16 to 18 years of age is entrusted to an adult for education or assistance purposes whom have abused such position – as specified under article 167/1(b) of the Macau Criminal Code).
Sex with minors younger than 14 years old is more severely punished (1 to 8 years' imprisonment) compared to minors aged 14 or 15 (up to 4 years' imprisonment if the perpetrator abused the minor's inexperience). Anal sex, irrespective of the gender or orientation of the participants (male-male, female-female, male-female), has an aggravated punishment (3 to 10 years of prison if practiced with a minor under the age of 14 and up to 4 years if practiced with an older minor).


== Malaysia ==
The de facto age of consent for heterosexual sex in Malaysia is 16 for both sexes, as homosexual activity in Malaysia is illegal.
Under the Malaysian Penal Code (Act 574), Section 375, the specified age is 16;

 Rape. A man is said to commit "rape" who, except in the case hereinafter excepted, has sexual intercourse with a woman under circumstances falling under any of the following descriptions: (...) Sixthly – With or without her consent, when she is under sixteen years of age.
However, Article 17 of the Sexual Offences Against Children Act 2017 makes any sexual touching of a child (defined as under 18 years) punishable by up to 20 years imprisonment.


== Maldives ==
Sexual activity outside marriage is illegal in Maldives.
The legal age of marriage is 18 for both males and females (16 with parental consent).


== Mongolia ==
The age of consent in Mongolia is 16, regardless of gender or sexual orientation.


== Myanmar ==
The age of consent in Myanmar is 16. It was raised from 14 with the amendment of the Myanmar Penal Code section 375, paragraph 5 in 2016.
If married, the legal age is now 15.


== Nepal ==
The age of consent in Nepal is 18 regardless of gender or sexual orientation.


== North Korea ==
The age of consent in North Korea is 15.


== Oman ==
Sexual activity outside marriage is illegal in Oman.


== Pakistan ==
Sexual activity outside marriage is illegal in Pakistan. 
The minimum legal age of marriage is 18 for males and females. There is no separate consent age law, so the marriage age is taken as the consent age.


== Palestine ==


=== Gaza Strip ===
In the Gaza Strip, any kind of sexual activity outside marriage and homosexual activity is illegal.


=== West Bank ===
The age of sexual consent is the same as in Jordan. Consensual sex is legal at the age of 16 years regardless of gender.


== Philippines ==
The minimum age for consensual sex is set at 16 years, regardless of gender and/or sexual orientation. There is a close in age exemption for adolescents aged 13–15 if their partner is less than three years older.
Until 2022, the age of consent was 12. Sexual intercourse with a person under the age of 12 was defined as rape, under Chapter 3, Article 266 of the Anti-Rape Law of 1997.
However, while consensual sex with a person under age 18 is not statutory rape, it is still a violation of the law if the child is found to be "exploited in prostitution or subject to other sexual abuse". Under Republic Act No. 7610, a child is defined as a person below 18 years of age and the law reads:

Article III, Section 5. Child Prostitution and Other Sexual Abuse.
Children, whether male or female, who for money, profit, or any other consideration or due to the coercion or influence of any adult, syndicate or group, indulge in sexual intercourse or lascivious conduct, are deemed to be children exploited in prostitution and other sexual abuse.
"Other sexual abuse" requires "some form of compulsion equivalent to intimidation". The courts have specified that "influence" means "improper use of power or trust in any way that deprives a person of free will and substitutes another's objective".
Although it does not specifically deal with sexual activity, Article VI, Section 10 of Republic Act 7610 can be considered to establish a de facto maximum close in age exception of 10 years for minors aged 12 to 17 years.

ARTICLE VI Other Acts of Abuse
Section 10. Other Acts of Neglect, Abuse, Cruelty or Exploitation and Other Conditions Prejudicial to the Child's Development...
(b) Any person who shall keep or have in his company a minor, twelve (12) years or under or who in ten (10) years or more his junior in any public or private place, hotel, motel, beer joint, discotheque, cabaret, pension house, sauna or massage parlor, beach and/or other tourist resort or similar places shall suffer the penalty of prison mayor in its maximum period and a fine of not less than Fifty thousand pesos (P50,000): Provided, That this provision shall not apply to any person who is related within the fourth degree of consanguinity or affinity or any bond recognized by law, local custom and tradition or acts in the performance of a social, moral or legal duty.
Articles 337–338 of the same Anti-Rape Law of 1997 specifies the crime of "simple seduction"; this requires gaining the consent of a 12-17-year-old through the use of deceit (generally a false promise of marriage), and Article 343 that defines eloping with a girl 12–18 as consented abduction, which is also outlawed.
Several proposals had been made to increase the age of sexual consent  from 12 to 18 years old in the 2010s. In 2020, the Philippine House of Representatives Committees on Revision of Laws and Welfare of Children passed a proposal to raise it to 16. In September 2021, the Philippine Senate unanimously voted in favor of the age of consent bill, and President Rodrigo Duterte signed the Senate proposal into law in March 2022.


== Qatar ==
Any kind of sexual activity outside the confines of marriage is illegal in Qatar. 
According to the Family Act, the minimum age of marriage is 18 for boys and 16 for girls. A court may allow a marriage below the minimum ages – as specified, but it requires the consent of the legal guardian of, as well as the consent of the two persons under the specified ages to be married.


== Saudi Arabia ==
Any kind of sexual activity outside marriage is illegal in Saudi Arabia. In 2019, Saudi Arabia officially banned all marriages under the age of 18 for both men and women. The Saudi Shura Council had outlawed marriages under the age of 15, and required court approval for those under 18. In accordance with the Child Protection Law, the law has a provision that states "Before the conclusion of the marriage contract, it is necessary to ensure that a person marrying under the age of 18 will not be harmed, whether male or female."


== Singapore ==
The general age of consent in Singapore is set at 16, regardless of gender and/or sexual orientation. However, where there is a relationship of trust, authority or dependency, the age of consent is 18. The relationship must not be exploitative of the younger person.
In addition, Sections 375, 376, 376A, 376AA, 376EA, 376EC, 376EE, 377BL and 377D criminalize sexual activity with individuals below the age of 18 if the relationship is deemed exploitative of the younger person. Section 377CA stipulates that the court can determine if such a relationship is exploitative depending on the "circumstances of each case" – including age gap between the accused and the youth, the nature of the relationship, and the degree of control or influence exercised by the accused person over the minor.  It also stipulates that – unless the accused is married to the younger partner – such relationships will be deemed exploitative until proven otherwise, if:

(a) the accused person is the parent, step-parent, guardian or foster parent of the minor;
(b) the accused person is the de facto partner of the parent, guardian or foster parent of the minor;
(c) the accused person is a member of the teaching or management staff of the school or educational institution at which the minor is a student;
(d) the accused person has an established personal relationship with the minor in connection with the provision of religious, sporting, musical or other instruction to the minor;
(e) the accused person is a custodial officer of an institution in which the minor is detained;
(f) the accused person is a registered medical practitioner, a registered traditional Chinese medicine practitioner or a psychologist and the minor is a patient of the accused person;
(g) the accused person is an advocate and solicitor or a counsellor and the minor is a client of the accused person.
In addition, Section 376B criminalizes commercial sexual activity with youth under 18 – regardless of whether it occurs within or outside Singapore.  Section 376D also further criminalizes attempting to travel outside Singapore for the purposes of committing such actions outside Singapore.
Homosexuality between females was decriminalized in 2007, and on November 29, 2022, Parliament of Singapore repealed section 377A of the Penal Code and decriminalized homosexuality between males.


== South Korea ==
The age of consent in South Korea is 16 for both males and females regardless of gender or sexual orientation.
In South Korea, sexual activity with a person under the age of 16 (in international age, not "Korean age") is considered statutory rape, unless the other party is under 19. Sex with a child under 13 is considered statutory rape under all circumstances. Prior to 2020 the age of consent in South Korea was 13.


== Sri Lanka ==
The age of consent in Sri Lanka is 16 regardless of gender or sexual orientation. However, girls belonging to Sri Lanka's Moor and Malay minorities representing approximately 10% of the national population are allowed to marry after 12 years of age and below the age of 12 with the approval of the religious leader, Moulavi and either father, brother, uncle, grandfather.
...
(e) with or without her consent when she is under sixteen years of age, unless the woman is his wife who is over twelve years of age and is not judicially separated from the man.
365B. (1) Grave sexual abuse is committed any person who, for sexual gratification, does any act, by the use of his genitals or any other part of the human body or any Instrument on any orifice or part of the body of any other person, being an act which does not amount to rape under section 363, in circumstances falling under any of the following descriptions, that is to say:
(a) without the consent of the other person;
(aa) with or without the consent of the other person when the other person is under sixteen years of age;
...


== Syria ==
The age of consent in Syria is 15, per Article 491.
Article 491:
1. Every person who has sexual intercourse with a minor under 15 years of age shall be liable to a term of nine years' imprisonment at hard labour.
2. The said term shall be not less than 15 years if the child is under 12 years of age.


== Taiwan ==
The age of consent in Taiwan is 16 regardless of gender. The sentence is reduced or exempted if the offender is under 18. Also, if the offender is under 18, it's an offense indictable only upon a complaint. The penalties for having consented sexual intercourse with minors are separated into 2 age ranges, with those under 14 subject to 3 to 10 years,  and those between 14 and 16 subject to a maximum of 7 years. Note that since such cases with "offenders" under 18 are indictable only upon complaint, practically if both parties are under 16, parents most likely would not press charges in fear of the fact that if one side sues, the other side may sue as well resulting in both minors being sentenced.


== Tajikistan ==
The age of consent in Tajikistan is 16, as specified in article 141 of the Criminal Code. The penalty is specified as deprivation of freedom for 2 to 5 years.
Article 141. Sexual Intercourse And Other Actions of Sexual Character With an Individual Under 16 Years of Age
"(1) Sexual intercourse, homosexuality or lesbianism committed by an individual at the age of 18 years with an individual under 16 years of age when there are no elements of the crime stipulated by Article 138 and Article 139 of the present Code, is punishable by deprivation of freedom for a period of 2 to 5 years."
Articles 138 and 139 provide harsher penalties for Rape and Forcible sex against minors, including the possible death penalty for rape of a girl under 14.


== Thailand ==
The age of consent in Thailand is 15 regardless of gender or sexual orientation, as specified by article 279 of the Thai Criminal Code. The current legislation applies to all regardless of gender or sexual orientation. A close-in-age exemption allows sexual acts from age 14 if the older party is no more than 21.
However, parts of the Prevention and Suppression of Prostitution Act, which disallow any sexual contact with prostitutes under the age of 18, are widely interpreted by some local authorities to cover sexual acts classed as "obscenity for personal gratification". The Penal Code Amendment Act of 1997 (Section 283 bis) implies this to be within the context of sexual trafficking. A high-profile example of this application of the law was a statutory rape charge filed against the lead singer of the Thai band Big Ass for allegedly having had sex with a (then) 16-year-old girl. The charge was filed by the girl after the singer refused to take responsibility for her baby. The singer has since been cleared of being the baby's father due to the results of a paternity test and he received 2 years suspended sentence.


== Turkey ==
The age of consent in Turkey is 18.
According to Article 104 of the Turkish Penal Code (Türk Ceza Kanunu), sexual intercourse with minors aged 15, 16 and 17 can only be prosecuted upon a complaint. These complaints require the intention of the youth over the age of 15 and not the parents. However, if the offender is a person who is forbidden to marry the child by law or is a person who is obliged to take care of the child due to adoption or foster care, then the prosecution doesn't require a complaint and the punishment is aggravated.
Article 103 regulates any kind of sexual activity with minors under 15 (or minors under 18 who lack the ability to understand the legal meanings and consequences of such actions) as child sexual abuse.


=== History ===
The Ottoman Empire, a predecessor state to the Republic of Turkey, decriminalized sodomy in 1858. The age of consent in Turkey was set at 15 for both heterosexual and homosexual sex in the 1926 penal code, but this was raised to 18 in 1953. The new penal code of 2004 also set the age of consent for both heterosexual and homosexual sex at 18, with some differences, such as the act of having sexual intercourse with a minor over 15 being punishable upon a complaint.


== Turkmenistan ==
The age of consent in Turkmenistan is 16.


== United Arab Emirates ==
Sexual activity outside marriage is illegal in the United Arab Emirates. The general legal age of marriage is 18 for both sexes (although mature minors are allowed to marry with judicial permission).
In 2020, United Arab Emirates decriminalized sex outside of marriage. Consensual sex will be punished by the law if the victim, male or female, is under 18 years of age, or if the victim is deprived of their will due to their young age, insanity or mentally challenged or if the culprit is a first degree relative of the victim or responsible for their upbringing or usual care or has an authority of the minor victim.
A person convicted of committing sexual intercourse with a minor or mentally challenged person by force would be punished by the death penalty.


== Uzbekistan ==
The age of consent in Uzbekistan is 16 for heterosexual sex as well as for homosexual activities not amounting to anal sex, which is illegal regardless of age and punishable with imprisonment for up to three years (called Besoqolbozlik).
Sexual relations with a person under sixteen (16) years of age, Clause 128 of the Criminal Code: (1) A sexual relation or satisfaction of sex requirements in the unnatural form with a person who was obviously less than sixteen (16) years old, shall be punished by corrective labour measures for up to two (2) years or by the arrest up to six (6) months, or with imprisonment for up to one (1) year.


== Vietnam ==
The 2015 Penal Code indicates that the age of consent in Vietnam is 16 regardless of gender or sexual orientation.
Article 145 criminalizes sexual activity with those aged 13–15 in situations not amounting to rape (article 142 – requires threat or violence) or sexual abuse (article 144 – employing "trickery" to make a 13-15-year-old who is the offender's care-dependent or a person in extreme need "reluctantly engage in sexual intercourse or other sexual activities").

Article 145. Engaging in sexual intercourse or other sexual activities with a person aged from 13 to under 16
1. Any person aged 18 or over who engages in sexual intercourse or other sexual activities with a person aged from 13 to under 16 in cases other than those specified in Article 142 and Article 144 hereof shall face a penalty of 01 – 05 years' imprisonment.
2. This offence committed in any of the following cases shall carry a penalty of 03 – 10 years' imprisonment:
a) The offence has been committed more than once;
b) The offence is committed against 02 or more people;
c) The offence is of an incestuous nature;
d) The offence results in the victim's pregnancy;
dd) The offence results in 31% – 60% physical disability of the victim;
e) The offence is committed against a person for whom the offender is responsible for providing care, education, or medical treatment.
3. This offence committed in any of the following cases shall carry a penalty of 07 – 15 years' imprisonment:
a) The offence results in ≥ 61% physical disability of the victim;
b) The offender commits the offence in the knowledge of his HIV infection.

4. The offender might be forbidden from practicing his/her profession or doing certain jobs for 01 – 05 years.
Article 146. Molestation of a person under 16
1. Any person who molests a person under 16 for purposes other than sexual intercourse or other sexual activities shall face a penalty of 06 – 36 months' imprisonment.
2. This offence committed in any of the following cases shall carry a penalty of 03 – 07 years' imprisonment:
a) Organized crime;
b) The offence has been committed more than once;
c) The offence is committed against 02 or more people;
d) The offence is committed against a person for whom the offender is responsible for providing care, education, or medical treatment;
dd) The victim suffers from 11% – 45% mental and behavioral disability because of the offence; e) Dangerous recidivism.
3. This offence committed in any of the following cases shall carry a penalty of 07 – 12 years' imprisonment:
a) The victim suffers from 46% mental and behavioral disability or above because of the offence; b) The offence results in the suicide of the victim.

4. The offender might be forbidden from practicing his/her profession or doing certain jobs for 01 – 05 years.
Article 147. Employment of a person under 16 for pornographic purposes
1. Any person aged 18 or over who persuades, entices, forces a person under 16 to participate in a pornographic performance or watch a pornographic performance in any shape or form shall face a penalty of 06 – 36 months' imprisonment.
2. This offence committed in any of the following cases shall carry a penalty of 03 – 07 years' imprisonment:
a) Organized crime;
b) The offence has been committed more than once;
c) The offence is committed against 02 or more people;
d) The offence is committed against a person for whom the offender is responsible for providing care, education, or medical treatment;
dd) The offence is committed for commercial purposes;
e) The victim suffers from 11% – 45% mental and behavioral disability because of the offence;
g) Dangerous recidivism.
3. This offence committed in any of the following cases shall carry a penalty of 07 – 12 years' imprisonment:
a) The victim suffers from 46% mental and behavioral disability or above because of the offence; b) The offence results in the suicide of the victim.

4. The offender might be forbidden from practicing his/her profession or doing certain jobs for 01 – 05 years.


== Yemen ==
Any kind of sexual activity outside marriage is illegal in Yemen. Until recently, Yemeni law set the age of marriage at 15. However, that law has been eradicated. Now, "Yemeni law allows a girl of any age to wed, but it forbids sex with them until the indefinite time they are suitable for sexual intercourse.'" In 1999, the minimum marriage age of fifteen for women, rarely enforced, was abolished; the onset of puberty, interpreted by ulama to be at the age of nine, was set as a requirement for consummation of marriage.
In April 2008, the case of Nujood Ali, a 10-year-old girl who successfully obtained a divorce, sparked headlines around the world, and prompted calls to raise the legal age for marriage to 18. Later in 2008, the Supreme Council for Motherhood and Childhood proposed to define the minimum age for marriage at 18 years. The law was passed in April 2009, but dropped the following day following maneuvers by opposing parliamentarians. Negotiations to pass the legislation continue.


== See also ==
Age-of-consent reform
Age of consent
Age of consent by country
Ages of consent in Africa
Ages of consent in Europe
Ages of consent in North America
Ages of consent in Oceania
Ages of consent in South America
Comprehensive sex education
LGBT rights in Asia
Sex education


== References ==.
The legal status of drugs and drug precursors varies substantially from country to country and is still changing in many of them. United Nations classify drugs internationally, it affects all its member states.


== Territories ==


== Countries ==


== References ==.
Rights affecting lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and queer (LGBTQ) people vary greatly by country or jurisdiction—encompassing everything from the legal recognition of same-sex marriage to the death penalty for homosexuality.

Notably, as of January 2025, 38 countries recognize same-sex marriage. By contrast, not counting non-state actors and extrajudicial killings, only two countries are believed to impose the death penalty on consensual same-sex sexual acts: Iran and Afghanistan. The death penalty is officially law, but generally not practiced, in Mauritania, Saudi Arabia, Somalia (in the autonomous state of Jubaland) and the United Arab Emirates. LGBTQ people also face extrajudicial killings in the Russian region of Chechnya. Sudan rescinded its unenforced death penalty for anal sex (hetero- or homosexual) in 2020. Fifteen countries have stoning on the books as a penalty for adultery, which (in light of the illegality of gay marriage in those countries) would by default include gay sex, but this is enforced by the legal authorities in Iran and Nigeria (in the northern third of the country).
In 2011, the United Nations Human Rights Council passed its first resolution recognizing LGBTQ rights, following which the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights issued a report documenting violations of the rights of LGBTQ people, including hate crimes, criminalization of homosexual activity, and discrimination. Following the issuance of the report, the United Nations urged all countries which had not yet done so to enact laws protecting basic LGBTQ rights. A 2022 study found that LGBTQ rights (as measured by ILGA-Europe's Rainbow Index) were correlated with less HIV/AIDS incidence among gay and bisexual men independently of risky sexual behavior.
The 2023 Equaldex Equality Index ranks the Nordic countries, Chile, Uruguay, Canada, the Benelux countries, Spain, Andorra, and Malta among the best for LGBTQ rights. The index ranks Senegal, Oman, Brunei, Afghanistan, Somalia, Eritrea, Gambia, and Iran among the worst. A 2023 Gallup opinion poll found that Nepal was the only non-Western country where the percentage of respondents considering their residential area to be a good place for gay or lesbian people exceeded 80%.
LGBT rights are supported by various international religious organizations, including progressive Christian denominations, Inclusive churches and progressive Jewish organizations.


== Scope of laws ==
Laws that affect LGBTQ people include, but are not limited to, the following:

laws concerning the recognition of same-sex relationships, including same-sex marriage, civil unions, and domestic partnerships
laws concerning same-sex parenting, including same-sex adoption
anti-discrimination laws in employment, housing, education, public accommodations
anti-bullying legislation to protect LGBTQ children at school
hate crime laws imposing enhanced criminal penalties for prejudice-motivated violence against LGBTQ people
bathroom bills affecting access to sex-segregated facilities by transgender people
laws related to sexual orientation and military service
laws concerning access to assisted reproductive technology
sodomy laws that penalize consensual same-sex sexual activity that may or may not target homosexuals, males or males and females, or leave some homosexual acts legal
adultery laws that same-sex couples are subject to
age of consent laws that may impose higher ages for same-sex sexual activity
laws regarding donation of blood, corneas, and other tissues by men who have sex with men
laws concerning access to gender-affirming surgery and gender-affirming hormone replacement therapy
legal recognition and accommodation of the affirmed gender


== History of LGBT-related laws ==


=== Ancient India ===
In ancient India, Ayoni or non-vaginal sex of all types was punishable in the Arthashastra. Homosexual acts were, however, treated as a smaller offence punishable by a fine, while unlawful heterosexual sex carried much harsher punishment. The Dharmsastras, especially the later ones like the Vashistha Dharmasutra, prescribed against non-vaginal sex. The Yājñavalkya Smṛti prescribed fines for such acts including those with other men. Manusmriti prescribed light punishments for such acts. Vanita stated that the verses about punishment for a sex between a woman and her maiden was due to its strong emphasis on a maiden's sexual purity.


=== Ancient Israel ===
The ancient Law of Moses (the Torah) forbids people from lying with people of the same sex (i.e., from having intercourse) in Leviticus 18 and gives a story of attempted homosexual rape in Genesis 19, in the story of Sodom and Gomorrah, after which the cities were soon destroyed with "brimstone and fire, from the Lord" and the death penalty was prescribed to its inhabitants – and to Lot's wife, who was turned into a pillar of salt because she turned back to watch the cities' destruction. In Deuteronomy 22:5, cross-dressing is condemned as "abominable".


=== Assyria ===
In Assyrian society, sex crimes were punished identically whether they were homosexual or heterosexual. An individual faced no punishment for penetrating someone of equal social class, a cult prostitute, or with someone whose gender roles were not considered solidly masculine. Such sexual relations were even seen as good fortune, with an Akkadian tablet, the Šumma ālu, reading, "If a man copulates with his equal from the rear, he becomes the leader among his peers and brothers". However, homosexual relationships with fellow soldiers, slaves, royal attendants, or those where a social better was submissive or penetrated, were treated as bad omens.
Middle Assyrian Law Codes dating 1075 BC has a particularly harsh law for homosexuality in the military, which reads: "If a man have intercourse with his brother-in-arms, they shall turn him into a eunuch." A similar law code reads, "If a seignior lay with his neighbor, when they have prosecuted him (and) convicted him, they shall lie with him (and) turn him into a eunuch". This law code condemns a situation that involves homosexual rape. Any Assyrian male could visit a prostitute or lie with another male, just as long as false rumors or forced sex were not involved with another male.


=== Ancient Rome ===
In ancient Rome, the bodies of citizen youths were strictly off-limits, and the Lex Scantinia imposed penalties on those who committed a sex crime (stuprum) against a freeborn male minor. Acceptable same-sex partners were males excluded from legal protections as citizens: slaves, male prostitutes, and the infames, entertainers or others who might be technically free but whose lifestyles set them outside the law.
A male citizen who willingly performed oral sex or received anal sex was disparaged, but there is only limited evidence of legal penalties against these men. In courtroom and political rhetoric, charges of effeminacy and passive sexual behaviors were directed particularly at "democratic" politicians (populares) such as Julius Caesar and Mark Antony.
Roman law addressed the rape of a male citizen as early as the 2nd century BC when it was ruled that even a man who was "disreputable and questionable" had the same right as other citizens not to have his body subjected to forced sex. A law probably dating to the dictatorship of Julius Caesar defined rape as forced sex against "boy, woman, or anyone"; the rapist was subject to execution, a rare penalty in Roman law. A male classified as infamis, such as a prostitute or actor, could not as a matter of law be raped, nor could a slave, who was legally classified as property; the slave's owner, however, could prosecute the rapist for property damage.
In the Roman army of the Republic, sex among fellow soldiers violated the decorum against intercourse with citizens and was subject to harsh penalties, including death, as a violation of military discipline. The Greek historian Polybius (2nd century BC) lists deserters, thieves, perjurers, and "...on young men who have abused their persons" as subject to the fustuarium, clubbing to death. Ancient sources are most concerned with the effects of sexual harassment by officers, but the young soldier who brought an accusation against his superior needed to show that he had not willingly taken the passive role or prostituted himself. Soldiers were free to have relations with their male slaves; the use of a fellow citizen-soldier's body was prohibited, not homosexual behaviors per se. By the late Republic and throughout the Imperial period, there is increasing evidence that men whose lifestyle marked them as "homosexual" in the modern sense served openly.
Although Roman law did not recognize marriage between men, and in general Romans regarded marriage as a heterosexual union with the primary purpose of producing children, in the early Imperial period some male couples were celebrating traditional marriage rites. Juvenal remarks with disapproval that his friends often attended such ceremonies. The emperor Nero had two marriages to men, once as the bride (with a freedman Pythagoras) and once as the groom. His consort Sporus appeared in public as Nero's wife wearing the regalia that was customary for the Roman empress.
Apart from measures to protect the prerogatives of citizens, the prosecution of homosexuality as a general crime began in the 3rd century of the Christian era when male prostitution was banned by Philip the Arab. By the end of the 4th century, after the Roman Empire had come under Christian rule, passive homosexuality was punishable by burning. "Death by sword" was the punishment for a "man coupling like a woman" under the Theodosian Code. Under Justinian, all same-sex acts, passive or active, no matter who the partners are, were declared contrary to nature and punishable by death.


=== British Empire ===

The United Kingdom introduced anti-homosexuality laws throughout its colonies, particularly in the 19th century when the British Empire was at its peak. As of 2018, more than half of the 71 countries that criminalised homosexuality were former British colonies or protectorates.
In 1861, the British Empire introduced Section 377 of the British Colonial Penal Code, outlawing consensual sexual activity between same-sex couples as well as labelling third gender communities such as the apwint people and Hijra as "outlaw tribes". This law was intended to criminalise acts "against the order of nature". Section 377 was used to prosecute people engaging in oral and anal sex along with homosexual activity.
Today, Section 377 still exists in some former British colonies:

 Bangladesh
 Malaysia
 Myanmar
 Pakistan
 Sri Lanka (as Section 365)
In addition to Section 377, the United Kingdom also introduced a number of laws targeting gender non-conformity throughout its colonies. In 1861, authorities of the North-Western Provinces (NWP) sought to enact a 'special law' against Hijra people in order to criminalise their identity. The Hijra were included in the Criminal Tribes Act (1871) and were monitored with the hope of eliminating their culture. Due to the passage of the Criminal Tribes Act (1871), Hijra people could not possess children.
While significant progress has been made to reverse these laws, the majority of the countries of the Commonwealth of Nations, formerly known as the British Commonwealth, still criminalise sexual acts between consenting adults of the same sex and other forms of sexual orientation, gender identity and expression. Homosexual activity remains a criminal offence in 29 of the 56 sovereign states of the Commonwealth; and legal in only 27. In 3 of these states, homosexual activity is punishable by death.
LGBTQ communities still face significant discrimination due to the influence of colonialism in former British colonies, despite these communities being accepted prior to British colonialism. In the Indic cultural sphere, references to a third sex can be found throughout the texts of India's religious traditions like Jainism and Buddhism as well as the Kama Sutra. The foundational work of Hindu law, the Manu Smriti (c. 200 BC–200 AD) explains humans as belonging to one of three biological sexes, indicating a belief that transsexuality was an inherent trait.


=== Netherlands ===
In 2001, the Netherlands was the first country in the world to legalize same-sex marriage.


== Global LGBT rights maps ==
Note that for simplicity the table below does not distinguish between 'legal' and 'lawful'. An action can only be legal or illegal where a specific law has been passed.


== Timeline ==


== LGBT-related laws by country or territory ==
Note: A country in this list is to be presumed to have equalized the age of consent at the same time as it decriminalized homosexual acts, unless otherwise noted.


=== Africa ===


=== Americas ===


=== Antarctica ===


=== Asia ===


=== Europe ===


=== Oceania ===


== See also ==

Capital punishment for non-violent offenses
Criminalization of homosexuality
Decriminalization of homosexuality
Discrimination against LGBTQ people
Human rights
Legal status of transgender people
Legality of conversion therapy
LGBTQ people in prison
Minority rights
Societal attitudes toward homosexuality


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==

International Lesbian and Gay Association
State-sponsored Homophobia report (2015 edition)
Lesbian and Gay Rights in the World map (2015 edition)
Amnesty International USA: LGBT legal status around the world – interactive map
Pride Legal Archived 5 March 2022 at the Wayback Machine – information by country
Human Rights Watch on LGBT Rights
International Gay and Lesbian Human Rights Commission resource links – for researching legal information
International Commission of Jurists, Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity and Justice – A Comparative Law Casebook
United Nations Human Rights Council, Discriminatory laws and practices and acts of violence against individuals based on their sexual orientation and gender identity, an annual report
United Nations, Living Free and Equal: What States Are Doing to Tackle Violence and Discrimination against Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender and Intersex People, November 2016.
This is a list of the legal status of psychoactive cacti by country. This includes but is not limited to the peyote, the San Pedro and the Peruvian torch.


== See also ==
Legal status of ayahuasca by country
Legal status of ibogaine by country
Legal status of psilocybin mushrooms
Legal status of psychoactive Amanita mushrooms
Legal status of Salvia divinorum
Legal status of psychedelic drugs in the United States
Legal status of psychedelic drugs in the United Kingdom
Legal status of psychedelic drugs in Canada


== References ==.
The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to American politics:
American politics – The politics of the United States.


== Features of American politics ==


=== Branches of government ===
Legislative Branch
List of United States Congresses
Executive Branch
Judicial Branch


=== Levels of government ===
National government
State governments
Local governments


=== Elections ===

Contested elections in American history
Electoral College
First-past-the-post voting
Gerrymandering
Nonpartisan blanket primary
Ranked-choice voting
Runoff voting
Suffrage


== History of American politics ==

History of the United States Congress


=== Party systems ===

First Party System
Second Party System
Third Party System
Fourth Party System
Fifth Party System
Sixth Party System


=== Notable events ===
Impeachment of Andrew Johnson
Direct election of Senators
Watergate scandal
Republican Revolution of '94
Impeachment of Bill Clinton


== American politics organizations ==


=== Political parties ===

List of political parties in the United States
The two major national parties are:

Democratic Party
History of the Democratic Party
Democrat in name only
Republican Party
History of the Republican Party
Republican in name only


== Documents central to American politics ==
United States Declaration of Independence
United States Constitution
The Federalist Papers
United States Bill of Rights


== Presidency ==

Acting President of the United States
Executive Office of the President of the United States
History
List of presidents of the United States
Natural-born-citizen clause (United States)
Powers of the president of the United States
Presidential immunity in the United States
United States presidential election
United States presidential line of succession
United States presidential pets
Nanny and Nanko


=== Joe Biden ===

American Rescue Plan Act of 2021
CHIPS and Science Act
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act
Withdrawal of Joe Biden from the 2024 United States presidential election


=== Donald Trump ===
 
Presidential campaigns
1988 campaign
2000 campaign
2012 campaign
2016 campaign
2020 campaign
2024 campaign
Attempts to overturn the 2020 United States presidential election
Donald Trump Supreme Court candidates
First Step Act
Great American Outdoors Act
Post-election lawsuits related to the 2020 U.S. presidential election
Tax Cuts and Jobs Act
Trump administration family separation policy
January 6 United States Capitol attack
Pardon of January 6 United States Capitol attack defendants
2025 United States trade war with Canada and Mexico
Liberation Day tariffs
Rhetoric of Donald Trump
E. Jean Carroll v. Donald J. Trump
Executive Order 13769
CARES Act
New York business fraud lawsuit against the Trump Organization
The Trump Organization
Impeachment of Donald Trump
Efforts to impeach Donald Trump
List of impeachment resolutions introduced against Donald Trump
Proposed expungements of the impeachments of Donald Trump
First impeachment of Donald Trump
First impeachment trial of Donald Trump
Impeachment inquiry against Donald Trump
Second impeachment of Donald Trump
Second impeachment trial of Donald Trump
Donald Trump Supreme Court candidates
Trump v. Anderson
Trumpism
List of people granted executive clemency by Donald Trump
Donald Trump sexual misconduct allegations
List of awards and honors received by Donald Trump
Stormy Daniels–Donald Trump scandal
Pseudonyms used by Donald Trump
Operation Southern Spear
Operation Absolute Resolve
Nicolás Maduro
Relationship of Donald Trump and Jeffrey Epstein
Personal and business legal affairs of Donald Trump


==== By time ====
Timeline of the Donald Trump presidencies
First presidency of Donald Trump
First cabinet of Donald Trump
Mike Pence
Rex Tillerson
Mike Pompeo
Immigration policy of the first Donald Trump administration
First inauguration of Donald Trump
Legal affairs of the first Donald Trump presidency
Tariffs in the first Trump administration
Second presidency of Donald Trump
Second cabinet of Donald Trump
JD Vance
Marco Rubio
Immigration policy of the second Donald Trump administration
Second inauguration of Donald Trump
Legal affairs of the second Donald Trump presidency
Tariffs in the second Trump administration


== Persons influential in American politics ==
Category:Lists of American politicians
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez
Barack Obama
Presidency of Barack Obama
Conspiracy theories
Barack Obama citizenship conspiracy theories
Barack Obama religion conspiracy theories
Zohran Mamdani
Founding Fathers of the United States


== See also ==
2021 United States Capitol car attack
Deep state conspiracy theory in the United States
Democratic backsliding in the United States
First hundred days (United States)
First 100 days of Franklin D. Roosevelt's presidency
First 100 days of Barack Obama's presidency
First 100 days of Donald Trump's first presidency
First 100 days of Joe Biden's presidency
First 100 days of Donald Trump's second presidency
Left–right political spectrum
Party switching in the United States
List of party switchers in the United States
Slavery in the United States
War on terror


=== Political positions ===
Vice President of the United States
List of vice presidents of the United States
Natural-born-citizen clause (United States)
Speaker of the United States House of Representatives
List of speakers of the United States House of Representatives
Chief Justice of the United States
List of chief justices


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Greenstein, Fred I. et al. Evolution of the modern presidency : a bibliographical survey (1977) bibliography and annotation of 2500 scholarly books and articles. online 4


== External links ==.
Heracles' Bow: Essays on the Rhetoric and Poetics of the Law is a collection of ten essays, written by James Boyd White in 1985, that examine forensic rhetoric as it creates community, as an example of what White calls constitutive rhetoric.  White supported the Law and Literature Movement. This movement was in contrast to two other movements of the 1970s and 1980s, Law and economics and Critical Legal Studies (CLS), in holding that a scientific view of law left little room to examine the rhetoric of written and spoken law itself.


== Content summary ==
In Heracles' Bow: Persuasion and Community in Sophocles' Philoctetes, James Boyd White, through an analysis of the ancient Greek play Philoctetes, distinguishes between two methods of persuasion: dolos (deceitful persuasion) and peitho (genuine statements made for the purpose of forming community).  White compares using rhetoric on another person as a means-to-an-end against viewing the person as an end-in-itself.  He relates this to the teaching of law through a discussion of methods that an attorney should use in the art of persuading others.
In Rhetoric and Law: The Arts of Cultural and Communal Life, White compares two definitions of law: his own, which is that law is a branch of rhetoric, and the traditional view of law as institutional authority.  He outlines three elements specific and necessary to legal rhetoric: first, that lawyers need to speak the language of their audience, or that law is culture-specific; second, that law is always a creative performance; and third, that legal rhetoric contains an ethical identity, or ethos.
The Study of Law as an Intellectual Activity: A Talk to Entering Students, originally a lecture given to a class of first-year law students, outlines how learning law is not simply memorizing a set of rules. White claims that, in learning law, it is imperative that students first identify their own ethos to become effective practitioners.
In The Invisible Discourse of the Law: Reflections on Legal Literacy and General Education, originally a lecture given to educators on writing, White argues that legal language is difficult to understand because the law is generalized and non-specific.  These characteristics mean that legal language is always subject to the interpretation of the reader, thus creating a rhetorical situation.
White contends in Reading Law and Reading Literature: Law as Language that law is a language and a lawyer must also operate as a literary critic. He explains how law is its own form of language, which means that it is subject to open interpretation. The language of the law creates a legal culture just as spoken languages have cultures associated with them.  A lawyer must use good judgment in interpreting the law just as individuals use good judgment in interpreting how to speak to one another.
In The Judicial Opinion and the Poem: Ways of Reading, Ways of Life White examines how reading poems and cases during his legal training enforced his belief that the practice of law is an art, and one can use this training to discover Truth.
In Fact, Fiction, and Value in Historical Narrative: Gibbon's Roads of Rome, White reasons that it is impossible for a narrative to exclude the author's values, no matter how factual it may be.  Using Gibbon's History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire as an example, he illustrates how the form, syntax, and presentation of any writing necessarily shape the way a reader receives the facts. As a result, the opinion of the reader is shaped by the opinion of the writer.
Telling Stories in the Law and in Ordinary Life: The Oresteia and "Noon Wine" explores how legal stories take root in the stories told by laypeople in social situations. He argues that it is impossible to tell a story in the language of the law without relying on a non-legal situation.
In Making Sense of What We Do: The Criminal Law as a System of Meaning, White asks whether criminal law makes sense as a system of meaning. He seeks to answer that question through an examination of the purpose of criminal law, which he concludes to be placing blame. He examines the rhetoric of criminal law in order to identify its true audience.
In the last essay, Plato's Gorgias and the Modern Lawyer: A Dialogue on the Ethics of Argument, White constructs his own Socratic dialogue to determine whether the ancient Platonian argument of rhetoric vs. dialectic can be applied to modern law. He argues that today's attorneys are a modern-day version of Plato's "Gorgias" and concludes with the importance of maintaining ethics in the practice of law.


== Scholarly review ==
David Cole argues that White's view and the CLS are not that different; both are built on ideology. Cole criticizes White for relying too much on law as an end in itself, and failing to address the practical application of tangible, codified law. Meanwhile, Weisberg's main criticism of Heracles' Bow is that White's explanation remains too abstract. He contends that White does not express any knowledge of the actual law or the application thereof. Weisburg argues that White relies on law too much as a function of pure rhetoric, and that he ignores the scientific aspect of the discipline. This is a common criticism of the Law and Literature Movement. Victoria Kahn claims that White's view of the law ignores the relationship of law and inequality. She criticizes his work for its lack of explaining how the rhetoric of law is applied to different genders, races, and classes in different ways. She argues that seeing law simply as a rhetorical situation ignores the real-life power struggles within the application of law to society.


== References ==.
The American Bar Association Medal (or ABA Medal) is the highest award given by the American Bar Association for "exceptionally distinguished service by a lawyer or lawyers to the cause of American jurisprudence." The ABA Board of Governors chooses the medal's recipient. The medal was authorized at the 50th anniversary meeting of the ABA in 1928. The first medal was given in 1929 and it has been given most, but not all, years since.
The medal itself was designed by Laura Gardin Fraser. On the obverse is a profile of John Marshall with the inscription "To the end it may be a government of laws and not of men," from the Constitution of Massachusetts. On the reverse is "Justitia" with a likeness of Lady Justice. It is four inches in diameter, the medal was originally crafted in 24-karat gold, later reduced to 14-karat gold. 


== List of recipients ==
Source: "Recipients of the American Bar Association Medal" at the American Bar Association website


== References ==.
Case law, also used interchangeably with common law, is a law that is based on precedents, that is the judicial decisions from previous cases, rather than law based on constitutions, statutes, or regulations. Case law uses the detailed facts of a legal case that have been resolved by courts or similar tribunals. These past decisions are called "case law", or precedent. Stare decisis—a Latin phrase meaning "let the decision stand"—is the principle by which judges are bound to such past decisions, drawing on established judicial authority to formulate their positions. 
These judicial interpretations are distinguished from statutory law, which are codes enacted by legislative bodies, and regulatory law, which are established by executive agencies based on statutes. In some jurisdictions, case law can be applied to ongoing adjudication; for example, criminal proceedings or family law.
In common law countries (including the United Kingdom, United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, Singapore, Ireland, India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Nepal, Bhutan, Israel and Hong Kong), it is used for judicial decisions of selected appellate courts, courts of first instance, agency tribunals, and other bodies discharging adjudicatory functions.


== In common law systems ==

In the common law tradition, courts decide the law applicable to a case by interpreting statutes and applying precedents which record how and why prior cases have been decided. Unlike most civil law systems, common law systems follow the doctrine of stare decisis, by which most courts are bound by their own previous decisions in similar cases. According to stare decisis, all lower courts should make decisions consistent with the previous decisions of higher courts. For example, in England, the High Court and the Court of Appeals are each bound by their own previous decisions, however, since the Practice Statement 1966 the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom can deviate from its earlier decisions, although in practice it rarely does. A notable example of when the court has overturned its precedent is the case of R v Jogee, where the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom ruled that it and the other courts of England and Wales had misapplied the law for nearly 30 years.
Generally speaking, higher courts do not have direct oversight over the lower courts of record, in that they cannot reach out on their initiative (sua sponte) at any time to overrule judgments of the lower courts.  Normally, the burden rests with litigants to appeal rulings (including those in clear violation of established case law) to the higher courts. If a judge acts against precedent, and the case is not appealed, the decision will stand.
A lower court may not rule against a binding precedent, even if it feels that it is unjust; it may only express the hope that a higher court or the legislature will reform the rule in question. If the court believes that developments or trends in legal reasoning render the precedent unhelpful, and wishes to evade it and help the law evolve, it may either hold that the precedent is inconsistent with subsequent authority, or that it should be distinguished by some material difference between the facts of the cases; some jurisdictions allow for a judge to recommend that an appeal be carried out. If that judgment goes to appeal, the appellate court will have the opportunity to review both the precedent and the case under appeal, perhaps overruling the previous case law by setting a new precedent of higher authority. This may happen several times as the case works its way through successive appeals. Lord Denning, first of the High Court of Justice, later of the Court of Appeal, provided a famous example of this evolutionary process in his development of the concept of estoppel starting in the High Trees case.


== How case law is made ==
The different roles of case law in civil and common law traditions create differences in the way that courts render decisions. Common law courts generally explain in detail the legal rationale behind their decisions, with citations of both legislation and previous relevant judgments, and often interpret the wider legal principles. The necessary analysis (called ratio decidendi), then constitutes a precedent binding on other courts; further analyses not strictly necessary to the determination of the current case are called obiter dicta, which constitute persuasive authority but are not technically binding. By contrast, decisions in civil law jurisdictions are generally shorter, referring only to statutes.
The reason for this difference is that these civil law jurisdictions adhere to a tradition that the reader should be able to deduce the logic from the decision and the statutes.
Some pluralist systems, such as Scots law in Scotland and types of civil law jurisdictions in Quebec and Louisiana, do not precisely fit into the dual common-civil law system classifications. These types of systems may have been heavily influenced by the Anglo-American common law tradition; however, their substantive law is firmly rooted in the civil law tradition. Because of their position between the two main systems of law, these types of legal systems are sometimes referred to as mixed systems of law.
Law professors traditionally have played a much smaller role in developing case law in common law than professors in civil law. Because court decisions in civil law traditions are historically brief and not formally amenable to establishing precedent, much of the exposition of the law in civil law traditions is done by academics rather than by judges; this is called doctrine and may be published in treatises or in journals such as Recueil Dalloz in France. Historically, common law courts relied little on legal scholarship; thus, at the turn of the twentieth century, it was very rare to see an academic writer quoted in a legal decision (except perhaps for the academic writings of prominent judges such as Coke and Blackstone). Today academic writers are often cited in legal argument and decisions as persuasive authority; often, they are cited when judges are attempting to implement reasoning that other courts have not yet adopted, or when the judge believes the academic's restatement of the law is more compelling than can be found in case law. Thus common law systems are adopting one of the approaches long-held in civil law jurisdictions.
Judges may refer to various types of persuasive authority to decide a case. Widely cited non-binding sources include legal encyclopedias such as Corpus Juris Secundum and Halsbury's Laws of England,  or the published work of the Law Commission or the American Law Institute. Some bodies are given statutory powers to issue guidance with persuasive authority or similar statutory effect, such as the Highway Code.
In federal or multi-jurisdictional law systems there may exist conflicts between the various lower appellate courts. Sometimes these differences may not be resolved, and it may be necessary to distinguish how the law is applied in one district, province, division or appellate department. Usually, only an appeal accepted by the court of last resort will resolve such differences and, for many reasons, such appeals are often not granted.
Any court may seek to distinguish the present case from that of a binding precedent, to reach a different conclusion. The validity of such a distinction may or may not be accepted on appeal of that judgment to a higher court. An appellate court may also decide on an entirely new and different analysis from that of junior courts, and may or may not be bound by its own previous decisions, or in any case, may distinguish them on the facts.
Where there are several members of a court deciding a case, there may be one or more judgments given (or reported). Only the reason for the decision of the majority can constitute a binding precedent, but all may be cited as persuasive, or their reasoning may be adopted in an argument. Apart from the rules of procedure for precedent, the weight given to any reported judgment may depend on the reputation of both the reporter and the judges.


== Nordic nations ==
The legal systems of the Nordic countries are sometimes included among the civil law systems, but as a separate branch, and sometimes counted as separate from the civil law tradition. In Sweden, for instance, case law arguably plays a more important role than in some of the Continental codified law systems. The two highest courts, the Supreme Court (Högsta domstolen) and the Supreme Administrative Court (Högsta förvaltningsdomstolen), have the right to set precedent which is in practice (however not formally) binding on all future application of the law. Courts of appeal, both general courts (hovrätter) and administrative courts (kammarrätter), may also issue decisions that act as guides for the application of the law, but these decisions may be overturned by higher courts. Thus case law is used to determine the actual applicability and limits of a law and not, as in common law jurisdictions, the creation of law.


== See also ==

Judicial activism
Legal opinion
Lists of case law
Precedent


== References ==


== External links ==
interactive database of European judgments of national courts in the EU
Queensland Case Law
Queensland Judgments reported and unreported case law.
Civil Law Initiative (French: Fondation pour le droit continental) is a public utility private institution headquartered in Paris, aiming at development of the civil law system and promotion of legal balance in the world.

The main objective of the Initiative is to develop the influence of the civil law tradition and its advantages, especially in relation to business and the economy. The Initiative aspires to become a meeting point of the academic world, the legal professions and the business world.
The establishment of the Initiative was announced by the French Minister of Justice on 1 March 2006. The founding members of the Initiative were:

Foundation of French Notaries
Caisse des dépôts et consignations
French National Bar Council
Schneider Electric
Veolia
TotalEnergies
In addition, the Initiative’s Board include representatives of several French ministries (the Ministry of Economy, Industry and Employment, the Ministry of Foreign Affaires and the Ministry of Justice), the Court of Cassation, as well as the College of Fellows and Association of Friends of the Initiative.


== Partner institutions ==
The Civil Law Initiative cooperates with multiple French and International institutions. Aside from the founders and members of the Initiative’s board, the list of partners include, inter alia:

Association Henri Capitant
Conseil d'État
ICC International Court of Arbitration
Constitutional Council of France
OHADA
Paris Chamber of Commerce
Senate of France
Société de Législation Comparée


== Summer University for Continental Law ==
The Summer University for Continental Law established by the Initiative was designed to enable the world’s comparative law specialists (lecturers, the legal professions, business lawyers and graduate students) to meet each year at Panthéon-Assas University in Paris. Numerous seminars and presentations on comparative law are given by pre-eminent specialists in the subject. The Summer University offers an intensive training course with a Certificate in Continental Law granted upon completion.


== See also ==
Civil law (legal system)
Legal systems of the world


== References ==


== External links ==
Fondation pour le droit continental - Civil Law Initiative.
Hessel E. Yntema (1891-1966) was a law professor and scholar. Yntema studies Hope College, the University of Michigan, Oxford University, and Harvard Law School. Yntema taught at Columbia Law School, Johns Hopkins, the University of Michigan. Yntema was a leading legal realist. Yntema founded The American Journal of Comparative Law in 1952 and ran the journal until his death. His final position was professor emeritus at the University of Michigan. In 1961, the book Twentieth Century Comparative and Conflicts Law: Legal Essays in Honor of Hessel E. Yntema was published, consisting of 38 essays from his peers. In addition to his professorship, Yntema served as the vice-president of the International Academy of Comparative Law.


== References ==


== External links ==
Works by or about Hessel E. Yntema at the Internet Archive
Hessel E. Yntema at Find a Grave.
D.V.D. v. Department of Homeland Security is a 2025 class action brought by a Cuban immigrant, with the court-authorized pseudonym of D.V.D., and three other immigrant plaintiffs seeking to prevent their deportation to a country other than their country of origin, without first being given the opportunity to challenge the deportation on the basis that they might face serious harm in that other country. The case was appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court in Department of Homeland Security v. D.V.D., and led to two U.S. Supreme Court opinions.
The deportation was planned by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. The hearing took place in the United States District Court for the District of Massachusetts with Judge Brian E. Murphy.

The court documents state the case asks the following question:Before the United States forcibly sends someone to a country other than their country of origin, must that person be told where they are going and be given a chance to tell the United States that they might be killed if sent there? The wording of the case continues with the following statement:Defendants argue that the United States may send a deportable alien to a country not of their origin, not where an immigration judge has ordered, where they may be immediately tortured and killed, without providing that person any opportunity to tell the deporting authorities that they face grave danger or death because of such a deportation.At the time of this court case, all nine justices of the Supreme Court had agreed in Trump v. J.G.G. that immigrants must be given notice and an opportunity to challenge their deportation. In the end, the members of the class action were part of the deportations in the second presidency of Donald Trump. However, the appeal based upon a preliminary injunction in this case is presently ongoing.


== Background ==
Eight migrants were deported to South Sudan but were rerouted to Djibouti and were held "in a conference room in a converted Conex shipping container at Camp Lemonnier" with temperatures exceeding 100 °F (38 °C). Additional concerns were raised over exposure to Malaria and close proximity to burn pits. "ICE officers and detainees complained of feeling ill within three days of their arrival to the base".
During the hearing before Murphy, DHS conducted a press conference titled DHS Press Conference on Migrant Flight to South Sudan during which a spokesperson claimed that they were confirming the fact that that's not their final destination after being asked, "Is the department then confirming that this flight is going to South Sudan?".
According to The Intercept, those taken out of the United States where informed they would be flying to Louisiana, taking them "out of the country without their knowledge or consent".


=== OCG ===
OCG is a Guatemalan man who traveled to the United States to claim asylum. In Mexico while traveling to the US, "he was held for ransom, raped and targeted for being gay, he said in a court declaration". "In May 2024, a U.S. asylum officer determined O.C.G. “had a reasonable fear” of returning to Guatemala". An immigration judge determined OCG would likely be persecuted in Guatemala and blocked his removal. Despite the judges actions, OCG was bussed to Mexico without notice and then sent to Guatemala where he went into hiding before returning to the United States at the order of Judge Murphy.


== March 28 TRO ==
On March 28, 2025, the court issued a temporary restraining order (TRO) which prohibited the defendants from being deported to a third country as well the following:Removing any individual subject to a final order of removal from the United States to a third country, i.e., a country other than the country designated for removal in immigration proceedings, UNLESS and UNTIL Defendants provide that individual, and their respective immigration counsel, if any, with written notice of the third country to where they may be removed, and UNTIL Defendants provide a meaningful opportunity for that individual to submit an application for CAT protection to the immigration court, and if any such application is filed, UNTIL that individual receives a final agency decision on any such application.The defendants filed an appeal the same day as the day for the announcement of the TRO.


== United States Court of Appeal for the First Circuit (TRO) ==

On March 28, the defendants filed an appeal to the court's temporary restraining order (TRO). The defendant's claimed the following:The district court’s universal injunction is unlawful, the government will suffer tremendous irreparable harm absent a stay, and the balance of equities favors interim relief, so this Court should grant a stay pending appeal.The plaintiffs filed an opposition to the motion, which included the following statement:Before the District Court, Defendants assert unfettered authority to deport noncitizens to countries that were not previously designated in immigration proceedings without providing any notice of which country, and thus without any meaningful opportunity to seek protection from persecution or torture in that unidentified country.The case was dismissed on June 30, 2025.


== April 18 preliminary injunction ==
On April 18, 2025, the United States District Court for the District of Massachusetts had in this case issued a preliminary injunction (preliminary legal order to stop the specific action) for all individuals who have a final removal order for whom the Department of Homeland Security has deported or will deport on or after February 18, 2025, to a country:

Not previously designated as the country or alternative country of removal, and
Not identified in writing in the prior proceedings as a country to which the individual would be removed.
Based on this preliminary injunction and the consequences to procedures for deportation on the national level, the defendants filed an appeal to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the First Circuit.


== United States Court of Appeal for the First Circuit (Preliminary Injunction) ==

The appeal, based on the April 18 preliminary injunction, was filed on April 22, 2025 by Attorney General Pam Bondi, Director of Homeland Security Kristi Noem, et al. The motivation by the defendants was based upon the preliminary injection (PI) being a nationwide class action. However, the plaintiffs presented the court the following: 
The PI does not prevent any third country deportation; rather, it requires that, beforehand, noncitizens and their counsel, if any, must receive written notice of the country to which they will be deported in a language they understand and a meaningful opportunity to assert a claim for protection under the Convention Against Torture (CAT) related to that third country. 
On July 10, the attorneys for the class action filed the following to the court as a class action complaint: DHS’ policy or practice of failing to afford these basic, minimal protections violates the Immigration and Nationality Act, the Foreign Affairs Reform and Restructuring Act, the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment, and the treaty obligations of the United States


== U.S. Supreme Court opinion on application of stay ==

U.S. Supreme Court determined in Department of Homeland Security v. D.V.D. (June 23, 2025) that the April 18, 2025 preliminary injunction was stayed (temporarily halted), pending the disposition of the appeal in the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit and disposition of a petition for a writ of certiorari (a court process to seek judicial review).


=== The legal theory on deportation to a third country ===
The Supreme court opinion describes U.S. law on deportation to a third country as an action of last resort. However, non-citizens are allowed to raise a claim under the United Nations Convention Against Torture. The U.S. is part of the United Nation Convention. In 1998, Congress passed the Foreign Affairs Reform and Restructuring Act, which states that:It shall be the policy of the United States not to expel, extradite, or otherwise effect the involuntary return of any person to a country in which there are substantial grounds for believing the person would be in danger of being subjected to torture, regardless of whether the person is physically present in the United States.


=== Dissenting opinion ===
Supreme Court Justice Sonia Sotomayor, Justice Elena Kagan, and Justice Ketanji Brown Jackson dissented on the ruling. The following is introduction to the dissenting opinion:In matters of life and death, it is best to proceed with caution. In this case, the Government took the opposite approach. It wrongfully deported one plaintiff to Guatemala, even though an Immigration Judge found he was likely to face torture there. Then, in clear violation of a court order, it deported six more to South Sudan, a nation the State Department considers too unsafe for all but its most critical personnel. An attentive District Court’s timely intervention only narrowly prevented a third set of unlawful removals to Libya.


== May 21 order on remedy ==
After the Supreme Court had issued an injunction in the April 28 case, the District Court issued an “order on remedy” on May 21. The order directs the Government to follow specified procedures with respect to those individuals, tailored to the circumstances. Out of concern that a federal deportation of migrants to a country, unrelated to the migrant's nation of origin (third country), may be a risk of torture and based upon the United Nations Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CAT), the remedial order requires "written notice to both the non-citizen and the non-citizen’s counsel in a language the non-citizen can understand" where:Following notice, the individual must be given a meaningful opportunity, and a minimum of ten days, to raise a fear-based claim for CAT prior to removal.


== Supreme Court opinion on clarification ==

Because of the order on remedy from the lower court, the solicitor general for the U.S. Department of Justice filed a motion on behalf of the Department of Homeland Security for clarification for the Supreme Court's decision. On July 3, 2025, the Supreme Court issued the opinion on the clarification, Department of Homeland Security v. D.V.D. (on motion for clarification). The opinion starts with the following: On April 18, 2025, the District Court for the District of Massachusetts preliminarily enjoined the Government from removing “any alien” to a “country not explicitly provided for on the alien’s order of removal” without following certain procedures designed to enable the alien to seek relief under the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CAT)...The clarification states was that the June 23 Supreme Court order stayed a lower court's April 18 preliminary injunction in full. The clarification states that:The May 21 remedial order cannot now be used to enforce an injunction that our stay rendered unenforceable. Based upon that court decision, the respondent (D.V.D. et al.) filed a response to the motion for clarification which included the following statement:Yesterday, this Court stayed the preliminary injunction (PI) pending appeal, without any reasoning. But that order does not change the fact that Defendants violated the preliminary injunction (PI), now stayed, but then in effect, over a month ago by attempting to remove these class members to South Sudan without providing meaningful notice or any opportunity to assert claims for protection under the Convention Against Torture (CAT).


=== Dissenting opinions to Supreme Court clarification ===
In terms of Supreme Court justices, the dissenting opinion from Justice Sonia Sotomayor and Justice Katanji Brown Jackson starts with the following: The United States may not deport noncitizens to a country where they are likely to be tortured or killed. International and domestic law guarantee that basic human right. In this case, the Government seeks to nullify it by deporting noncitizens to potentially dangerous countries without notice or the opportunity to assert a fear of torture. Because the Fifth Amendment, immigration law, federal regulations, and this Court’s precedent unambiguously prohibit such no-notice deportations


=== Results of clarification ===
The result of the July 3 Supreme Court ruling was that eight men who were in the class action case were allowed to be deported to war torn South Sudan, a country only one of the participants of the class action case had any relation to.
Jennie Pasquarella, an attorney with the Seattle Clemency Project, represented the migrants with last minute emergency motions to deny the deportation. On the evening of the July 3 Supreme Court clarification that the migrants could be deported and that District Court order was lifted, a new claim was filed by the attorney in Washington, D.C.. U.S. District Judge Randolph Moss paused the deportation on the afternoon of the July 4. Due to recent Supreme Court decisions on jurisdiction, he was required to forward the case back to Boston, where the case had originally been heard.
A final hearing was held on July 4, 2025, with the judge from the original United States District court for the District of Massachusetts, Judge Brian Murphy. However, the judge ruled that the July 3 Supreme Court ruling rendered his court powerless to stop the deportation because the majority of the justices had lifted the U.S. District Court judge's order blocking the deportation. Both hearings were held on Independence Day, which is a national holiday. However, the court hearings were held that day due to the deportation being scheduled for that evening.
Amidst the July 4 hearings, a Justice Department attorney read a statement from the South Sudanese government on how the migrants will be given temporary immigration status. The U.S. government has claimed in its own filings that the South Sudanese government has given diplomatic assurances that  will not be subjected to torture while the 8 men are in their country. On the evening of July 4, the eight men arrived in South Sudan by a U.S. government flight.
On July 8, 2024, the Associated Press reported that the eight men were in the custody of the South Sudanese government. Apuk Ayuel, a spokesperson for the foreign ministry, told reporters that the men were "under the care of the relevant authorities who are screening them and ensuring their safety and well-being.".
After the clarification, the D.V.D. v. Department of Homeland Security case was dismissed in the First Circuit. Litigation continues in the District Court over a motion for partial summary judgement.


== See also ==
Legal affairs of the second Donald Trump presidency
Immigration policy of the second Donald Trump administration
Deportation in the second presidency of Donald Trump


== Note ==


== References ==


== External links ==
District court docket on CourtListener
Court of appeals docket on CourtListener.
Secular laws regulating hairstyles exist in various countries and institutions.


== Present laws ==


=== India ===

In the armed, paramilitary and law enforcement forces of India, male Sikh servicemen are allowed to grow full beards as their religion expressly requires followers to do so. However, they are specifically required to "dress up their hair and beard properly". In December 2003, the Supreme Court of India ruled that Muslims in uniform can grow beards.
Non-Muslims and non-Sikhs serving in the Indian Army or the Indian Air Force are not permitted to grow beards. However, Army personnel on active duty are sometimes exempt from facial hair regulations for the duration of their tour of duty if their deployment makes it difficult to shave. Indian Navy personnel are allowed to grow beards with the permission of their commanding officer. Exceptions for other religions are made in the case of special forces operatives like the Indian Air Force pilots, the Indian army's Para (Special Forces) soldiers, and the navy's MARCOS commandos, who are allowed to grow beards. Non-Sikh personnel are allowed to grow whiskers and moustaches, with the only regulation being that they "will be of moderate length".


=== Iran ===
Women are required to wear the hijab by Iranian law, but there are no specific laws governing men's hairstyles in public, except in certain institutions like schools, the military, and for government employees, where particular hairstyles are not permitted. Additionally, according to the Head of the Tehran Men's Barbershop Union, some hairstyles for men, including those associated with Satanism, as well as ponytails, mullets, and spikes, have been banned in barbershops. In 2007, the authorities closed barbershops that did not comply with the rules.


=== North Korea ===

Radio Free Asia reported in 2014 that the North Korean government had a recommended list of 18 hair styles for women and 10 hair styles for men; further, some colleges had recommended male students model their hair after Kim Jong-un. However, Dr. Katharine H. S. Moon, Wasserman Chair of Asian Studies at Wellesley College, refutes these claims, stating that, "There's no evidence that their hairstyles must follow totalitarian regulation," and that she had personally witnessed a wide variety of hair styles, including hair dye, while visiting Pyongyang in 2013.


=== Tajikistan ===
Beards are discouraged by the government for most men in Tajikistan in a stated effort to battle radicalism. Only clean-shaven men can apply for a passport. Beards are often forcibly shaved off by police officers.


=== Turkmenistan ===
In modern Turkmenistan, since the late 1990s, a total ban on the wearing of beards has been unofficially imposed on all segments of the population, with the exception of the elderly over the age of 65 (in Turkmenistan they are called "yashuli") and Russian Orthodox and Armenian Church clerics and priests. Even Muslim imams and clerics under the age of 65 are prohibited from wearing even three days of stubble. Muslim men with beards longer than two weeks of stubble can be forcibly shaved off by the Police and added to the list of violators. In modern Turkmenistan, beards are associated with Islamic fundamentalism, so beard owners automatically become suspects among the Police and Special Services. Only mustaches are allowed. Unofficial beard bans in Turkmenistan are the most severe in Central Asia.


=== Thailand ===
Male Thai police and military personnel, as of 2017, are required to keep a hairstyle known as the "904 cut". The style means shaving the sides and back of the head, leaving just a suggestion of hair on top. The corresponding hairstyle for female police officers and female soldiers, in case of long hair (shoulder level), must keep their hair in a bun with the proper color of ribbon and net (black, dark brown or navy blue).
School dress codes in Thailand have long mandated earlobe-length bobs for girls and army-style crew cuts for boys. It is not uncommon for teachers to cut the hair of students deemed to be in violation of the frequently arbitrary code.


== Past laws ==


=== Albania ===
During his regime, Enver Hoxha banned all hair longer than 4 cm (1.6 in) for men, as well as all beards. No man could enter the country whilst wearing one of the banned hair styles.


=== British North America ===
Long hair for men was illegal in the Massachusetts Bay Colony starting in 1634.


=== China ===
The Han Chinese first Ming dynasty emperor Zhu Yuanzhang passed a law on mandatory hairstyle on 24 September 1392, mandating that all males grow their hair long and making it illegal for them to shave part of their foreheads while leaving strands of hair which was the Mongol hairstyle. The penalty for both the barber and the person who was shaved and his sons was castration if they cut their hair and their families were to be sent to the borders for exile. This helped eradicate the partially shaved Mongol hairstyles and enforced the long Han hairstyle.
In Qing dynasty China, all male subjects of all ethnicities were required to keep their hair in a long braid and to shave the front of their scalp. Those who resisted were subject to execution for treason.
Many Chinese men stopped sporting the Queue braid tonsure hairstyle, in favor of short western hairstyles, following the collapse the Qing Dynasty in the 1910s which was succeeded by the Republic of China.


=== Czechoslovakia ===

Following the Prague Spring of 1968, Western 1960s counterculture inspired the Mánička subculture amongst Czechoslovak youth. The long hairstyles associated with this was discouraged and suppressed by the authorities, who saw it as a subversive Western cultural influence.


=== Japan ===

In the Edo period (1603–1867) of Japan, the Tokugawa Shogunate passed orders for Japanese men to shave the pate on the front of their head (the chonmage hairstyle) and shave their beards, facial hair and side whiskers. This was similar to the Qing dynasty queue order imposed by Dorgon making men shave the pates on the front of their heads. During the fourth year of the Meiji period in 1871, Emperor Meiji issued the Dampatsurei Edict which abolished the chonmage hairstyle. As a result of the decree which was issued as part of the Meiji Restoration, all Japanese men were forced to chop off their topknots and switch to short Western hairstyles in addition to switching to Western clothing. The chonmage was abandoned along with the samurai class in the 1870s, as a result of the Meiji Restoration and modernization of Japan. However, this decree/edict abolishing the chonmage hairstyle did not apply to sumo wrestlers as they are permitted to continue sporting chonmage into the modern era.


=== Russia ===

As part of his drive to modernise and Westernise Tsarist Russia, Peter the Great imposed a beard tax in 1698 to encourage Russian men to shave off their beards. Men who kept their beards but refused to pay the tax were forcibly shaven.


=== Singapore ===

There was a national ban of long hair for men in Singapore; the reason was the growth of hippie subculture worldwide. The law has since changed and nowadays, men can display any kind of hairstyle.


=== South Korea ===
In 1973, South Korea under Park Chung-hee introduced the Minor Offenses Act which limited the length of hair for males and mandated a minimum length of skirts for females. There are no specific definitions of acceptable hair length, and violators were often taken to police stations and had their hair cut against their will.


=== Vietnam ===

The Han Chinese referred to the various non-Han "barbarian" peoples of north Vietnam and southern China as "Yue" (Viet) or Baiyue, saying they possessed common habits like adapting to water, having their hair cropped short and tattooed. The Han also said their language was "animal shrieking" and that they lacked morals, modesty, civilization and culture.
When Han Chinese ruled the Vietnamese in the Fourth Chinese domination of Vietnam due to the Ming dynasty's conquest during the Ming–Hồ War they imposed the Han Chinese style of men wearing long hair on short-haired Vietnamese men. Vietnamese were ordered to stop cutting and instead grow their hair long and switch to Han Chinese clothing in only a month by a Ming official. Ming administrators said their mission was to civilize the unorthodox Vietnamese barbarians. A royal edict was issued by Vietnam in 1474 forbidding Vietnamese from adopting foreign languages, hairstyles and clothes like that of the Lao, Champa or the Ming "Northerners". The edict was recorded in the 1479 Complete Chronicle of Dai Viet of Ngô Sĩ Liên in the Later Lê dynasty.


== See also ==


=== Hair related ===
Beard oil
Discrimination based on hair texture
Facial hair in the military
List of facial hairstyles
List of hairstyles
Moustache styles
Pigtail Ordinance


=== General ===
Dress code
Clothing laws by country
Hijab by country
Emo killings in Iraq


== References ==.
This glossary of French criminal law is a list of explanations or translations of contemporary and historical concepts of criminal law in France.


== Introduction ==


=== Scope ===
This glossary includes terms from criminal law under the legal system in France. Legal terms from other countries that use French language (Belgium, Canada, Switzerland, North Africa, etc.) are not included here. Terms from the French civil code (known as the Napoleonic Code) and from French administrative law are generally not included, unless they have repercussions for criminal law. Some common expressions for governmental agencies, position titles, or other concepts are included for convenience even if they are not unique to criminal law, as they come up frequently in definitions of other terms.


=== Disclaimer ===
There is absolutely no assurance that any statement contained in this article is true, correct, or precise. The information in this article is, at best, of a general nature and cannot substitute for the advice of a competent authority with specialized knowledge. This article (and all articles at Wikipedia) are covered by this legal disclaimer; please read it.


=== Style ===
Each entry consists of a bolded headword containing one French expression, followed by an indented section with a  translated equivalent or description of the term. Headwords appear as they would be if found in English running text; thus italicized, and in lower case unless always capitalized. Many of these terms can be found in French Wikipedia; if so, then the headword appears in blue and is linked directly to the French Wikipedia article. Below the headword, the indented text may contain either a direct translation of the French term, a definition or description of it, or some combination. A section symbol (§) prefixed before a term indicates a link to another term appearing on the page. Headwords are alphabetized as if they contained no embedded blanks; accented letters are alphabetized as if they were not accented; for example: à perpetuité comes after amende but before appel.


== Glossary ==


=== A ===

abrogation
repeal of an Act; revocation (of regulations, etc.)

abus
misuse; fraudulent misuse See also: § détournement.
Usage notes:
abus d'autorité ⟶ abuse (misuse) of official authority. See § abus de pouvoir below.
abus de biens sociaux ⟶ misuse of a company's property or credit
abus de confiance ⟶ misappropriation, embezzlement (see also: § détourner); fraudulent conversion. In other contexts (civil law) ⟶ breach of trust.
abus sexuel sur mineur ⟶ child sexual abuse
abus de faiblesse : see also disability abuse.
abus de pouvoir ⟶ abuse of power – exercise of a legal right only to cause annoyance, harm, or injury.
Other contexts (outside of criminal law):
abus de droit ⟶ (in civil law) abuse of rights
abus de position dominante (in commercial law) see Law 420-2.
accusatoire
adversarial. See § procédure accusatoire et contradictoire.
accusé
The accused person (or defendant, or suspect) suspected or accused of an § infraction of a serious type (i.e., a § délit or a  § crime). See also: § accusé, § auteur, § défendeur, § inculpé, § intimé, § prévenu.
acquittement
a decision by a § cour d'assises of not guilty against a defendant. See § relaxe.
acte de barbarie
inhumane act
acte d'écrou
See § écrou.
acte d'huissier
document served by the § huissier (court bailiff)
acte juridique
any document having legal significance; an instrument
a term which has no equivalent in English, but means any document or action which has legal implications (contrast § faits matériels). Examples: legacies, contract offers, notices of arrears, but not negligence or commission of a crime, which are faits matériels.
action publique
public prosecution; criminal proceedings. Actions carried out on behalf of society by the § Ministère public (Public Prosecutor's Office) against those involved in a criminal violation.  Action publique is defined by article 1 of the § CPP (French code of criminal procedure).
Usage note: déclencher l'action publique ⟶ to institute criminal proceedings
administration des preuves
presentation of evidence
administration penitentiaire
prison service
affaire
case
affaire pénale
criminal case
afflictif
See § Peine afflictive et infamante.
agent de la force publique
law enforcement officer; police officer; police. See also § force publique.
agent de police judiciaire
police officer; judicial police officers of the police nationale (National Police (France)), or gendarmes of the § gendarmerie nationale (National Gendarmerie) See also: § officiers de police judiciaire.
agents de répression
law enforcement officials. See § répressif.
agir sous l'empire de
act under the influence of
Usage note: agir sous l'emprise de ⟶ an eggcorn with the same meaning
agissements incriminés
criminal conduct
à huis clos
in camera
ajournement 
old term for § citation directe
à juste titre
correctly; properly

aliénation mentale partielle
partial mental disturbance; a perpetrator found by medical experts to have aliénation mentale partielle is § non-imputable and may be found to lack the § élément moral (mens rea) to be charged with an § infraction.
alinéa
paragraph
amende
fine
amende honorable
public confession, apology
ancien droit
pre-revolutionary law; law of the Ancien régime.
annuler
set aside, declare void; cancel, repeal, nullify. See also § casser.
Usage note:
annuler un jugement ⟶ set aside a judgment or ruling
action en annulation  ⟶ action to set aside
à perpetuité
life; for life
appel
an appeal. The appelant (same word and spelling in English) is the party who is appealing, while the § intimé (respondent) is the party who is the defendant in the appeal proceeding. See also: § pourvoi, § recours.
Usage notes:
fol appel ⟶ frivolous or vexatious appeal
interjeter appel ⟶ when an appeal is made to the Court of Appeal, the term "interjeter appel" is used
appel des causes ⟶ no recognized translation; nearest equivalent: pre-trial hearing.
application de la loi dans le temps
concerns the legal effects of a law which replaces or amends an older one on the same topic, and the extent to which it applies to situations which arose before it came into force. The old law nevertheless continues to have certain effects.
appréciation souveraine des juges
The exclusive jurisdiction of the court
arme
weapon
arrestation
arrest
arrêt
a judgment (of a court). judgment (of a higher court). Compare: § décision de justice, § jugement, § ordonnance, § relaxe. See also: § cour.
Note: not to be confused with: § arrêté.
Usage note:
arrêt de cassation – decision to quash a judgment of the lower courts
arrêt définitif – decision open to appeal on law rather than fact
arrêt de principe – leading case/seminal decision; case stating a legal principle
arrêt de rejet – final decision rejecting an appeal on points of law
grands arrêts – leading cases
jurisprudence (des arrêts) – case law; see § jurisprudence
prononcer ou rendre un arrêt – deliver judgment
suspendre ou surseoir l'éxecution d'un arrêt – suspend the execution of a judgment
arrêt de mise en accusation
Judgment in a criminal proceeding. See also: § mise en accusation.
arrêt de non-lieu
judgment of no case to answer. See also: § non-lieu.
arrêt de renvoi
a judgment referring a case back to another court.
arrêté
order, decision, decree (of a minister, mayor, or other administrative officer)
Note: not to be confused with: § arrêt.

Article 38
Describes an optional feature of lawmaking power-sharing between the parliament and the executive, which may be enabled by a § loi d'habilitation.
Assemblée nationale
National Assembly; the lower chamber of § parlement (parliament).
assemblée plénière
full sitting of the Cour de cassation
assermentation
See § prêter serment.
assigner
to summon.
Usage notes:
assigner [quelqu'un] en justice or ... au tribunal ⟶ to summon  [someone] to appear before the court
assigner [quelqu'un] à résidence ⟶ to restrict [someone] to a residence
association de malfaiteurs
conspiracy (or, when referring to the § auteurs, co-conspirators)
astreinte
a punitive measure by which a court obliges a guilty person to pay a certain sum of money per day of delay if he does not carry out a prior court order to give or to do something
See also: § être astreinte aux obligations du contrôle judiciaire.
à temps
fixed term
à titre exceptionnel
in exceptional cases
atteinte
attack
attendu que
phrase used to introduce part of a judgement; similar to "whereas"
attributions
powers
audience
(court) hearing, session
audition
questioning
Usage note: audition des témoins ⟶  hearing of witnesses
au sein de
within
auteur
principal offender, defendant; perpetrator. See also: § accusé,  § défendeur, § inculpé, § intimé, § prévenu.
auteur intellectuel
see § auteur moral
auteur matériel
principal offender.  See also § élément matériel.
auteur moral
person who is treated as the § auteur matériel (principal offender), even if they did not carry out the § élément matériel (actus reus) of the offense; also known as the auteur intellectuel. See also § élément moral.
autorité judiciaire
ordinary courts; judicidary; judicial power
Usage note: avertir les autorités judiciaires ⟶ to alert the legal authorities
autorité legitime
legitimate authority
auxiliaire de justice
officer of the court
avant ... ans révolus
Before turning ... [years old]
Example: avant 18 ans révolus ⟶ "before turning eighteen".
avertissement
summons (in criminal proceedings)

aveu
Confession, or more rarely, statement
avocat
a lawyer, similar to a barrister, with a specific education and training track which is separate from the § procureurs, who have different professional training and are part of the § magistrature.
The profession of avocat is the oldest in France, going back to the Roman period. They play four roles: providing advice before and during trial (assistance), writing reports on behalf of the client (représentation), giving legal advice, and writing documents. Previously, the professions of § avoués and legal advisors (§ conseils juridiques) were separate and had responsibility for some of the advice and documentary roles, but these were merged into the avocat role in 1971 and 1990. There are about 44,000 avocats.
avoué
solicitor; lawyer before the Cour d'Appel
established in a law of 2 November 1945 with later modifications, they previously had sole responsibility for drafting all court pleadings. In a 1971 law, this responsibility was passed to avocats for courts of the first instance, with the avoués retaining responsibility for appeals documents. There remain a few hundred avoués to fulfill this role.


=== B ===

baïonette intelligente
principle according to which subordinates are expected to ensure the legality of an order before executing it. From the term "intelligent bayonet" meaning "intelligent soldier" (baionnette = soldier, by metonymy) who must consider whether an orders he is given is legal or not.
bande organisée
organized gang
bannissement
banishment. A type of  punishment under the Ancien régime. See § peine afflictive et infamante.
barreau
See § ordre des avocats.
blanchiment
money laundering; also, whitewashing, and in non-legal context: bleaching
bloc de constitutionnalité
the constitutional block is a set of texts recognized as being invested with the same constitutional force as the French Constitution itself. It includes the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen (1789), the preamble of the Constitution of 1946,  and the Charter for the Environment (2004).See also § valeur constitutionnelle.
bon père de famille
reasonable person; a bonus pater familias, reasonable man
bourreau
state executioner
bracelet électronique
See § Placement sous surveillance électronique (PSE), § placement sous surveillance électronique mobile (PSEM).
bracelet GPS
See § placement sous surveillance électronique mobile.


=== C ===

caduc
null, void, obsolete (feminine form: caduque)
capacité juridique
legal competence. The ability to have rights and obligations and to exercise them oneself. Minors do not have it, neither do adults under guardianship (tutelle) or curatorship (curatelle).
carcan
an iron collar placed around the neck of a § condamné (prisoner) and fixed to a pillory, a symbol of § haute justice in medieval France. See § peine afflictive et infamante.
cas de force majeure
See § force majeure.
casier judiciaire
criminal record. A record of criminal convictions stored at the National Criminal Record Office of the Ministry of Justice in Nantes.
cassation
Reversal by the § Cour de cassation or by the § conseil d'Etat of a judicial decision rendered contrary to the rules of law.
casser
set aside, annul, quash. See also § annuler.
causes de non-imputabilité
grounds for which a judge might declare a defendant not morally responsible (cf. § élément moral) for a crime, even if they are materially responsible (cf. § élément matériel) for it. It is up to legislators to decide, generally speaking, what acts are to be considered criminal, and it is up to the judges to decide in individual cases whether a defendant is criminally responsible for an act. Some grounds are codified by legislators, such as dementia, physical or moral constraint; the concept of criminal responsibility, in effect presupposes that the perpetrator of a given action acted in full control of their faculties and with § libre arbitre (free will). See also § élément moral, § intention, § aliénation mentale partielle.
céder
to supply. See § cession.
centre de détention
A prison or institutional housing for those inmates with the best prospects for reintegration into society. Their detention is mainly oriented towards the resocialization of prisoners.
centre de semi-liberté
A prison which houses convicts admitted under the § régime de semi-liberté (semi-liberty regime).
cession de stupéfiants
a supply of drugs. From the verb § céder.
Chambre correctionelle
Criminal Division (of the § Tribunal correctionnel, § Tribunal de grande instance, or § Cour d'assises)
Usage note: in larger jurisdictions, numbered to distinguish one from another, as in, le ne chambre correctionalle ⟶ "the nth criminal division"
Chambre d'accusation
division of a § Cour d'appel (appeal court) in charge of a judicial investigation, known since 2000 as the § Chambre de l'instruction
Chambre de l'instruction
name given to the old § Chambre d'accusation following the law of 15 June 2000 on the § Loi sur la présomption d'innocence (Law on the presumption of innocence; a.k.a. § Loi Guigou)
A panel of the § Cour d'appel that examines appeals of decisions rendered by a § juge d'instruction and reviews their lawfulness. Example: order for § mise en examen (indictment); placement under § contrôle judiciaire (judicial supervision).
chose jugée
res judicata
citation
A document delivered by a § huissier de justice (bailiff) or issued by the § greffe (court registry) that orders a person to appear before a court. Example: § citation (summons to appear).
citation directe
A summons delivered to an individual by a § huissier to appear at a certain date before the § tribunal de police or § tribunal correctionnel. Called an § ajournement under the old system.
CJUE
The Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU) (Cour de justice de l'Union européenne).
classement sec
A decision by the § ministère public (Public Prosecutor's Office) not to prosecute an offense, but to close the affair.
classement sans suite
case dismissed, charges dropped, or no further action (by the prosecutor's office);  In the event of an offense, the § ministère public (Public Prosecutor's Office) may decide not to initiate § action publique (criminal proceedings) against the § auteur (perpetrator). The decision can be taken for legal reasons or based on the evidence of the investigation: unidentified perpetrator, absence or insufficient evidence, withdrawal of complaint. See also: § opportunité des poursuites. Contrast: § non-lieu, a dismissal by the § juge d'instruction.
coauteur
a joint principal; based on the idea of a joint endeavor, in which two or more people involved in an act are equally liable for everything that happens, regardless whether they were present or not. The mens rea formed by one is imputed to the others.
Code des délits et des peines
The Code of Offences and Penalties was a criminal code adopted in revolutionary France by the National Convention on 25 October 1795 dealing with judicial organization, § procédure pénale (criminal procedure), and § sanction pénale (criminal sanctions). It established a division between the § police administrative and § police judiciaire (administrative and judiciary police), and led to the duality of the judicial system (§ dualité des ordres de juridiction) with the distinction between the § ordre administratif and the § ordre judiciaire still in force.
 (CPP)
French Code of Criminal Procedure. The legal code adopted in 1958 which covers all aspects of French criminal procedure. It a direct successor of and replaced the § Code d'instruction criminelle of 1808. It guides the behavior of police, prosecutors, and judges in how to deal with a possible crime. The current code was established in 1958, and replaced the code of 1808, created under Napoleon.
Code d'instruction criminelle
The Code of Criminal Procedure of 1808  is a collection of legal texts which organized criminal procedure in the revolutionary era in France. It was replaced by the French code of criminal procedure in 1958.
code pénale
French criminal code; also called the "penal code".
commetre
to commit
commission rogatoire
A request from a judge in one jurisdiction, to an § officier de police judiciaire or to a judge in another (or in a foreign country) to carry out investigative measures or other judicial acts on their behalf. Similar to Letters rogatory. The § juge d'instruction can delegate investigative acts to the police via a commission rogatoire
delegation of authority by a judge, usually to the police, to carry out the initial investigation of the case
comparution
Appearance; the act of appearing in court.
comparution immédiate
Procedure by which the perpetrator of an § infraction is brought before the § tribunal correctionnel at the end of his § garde à vue (custody), to be tried. See also § flagrant délit.
comparution sur reconnaissance préalable de culpabilité (CRPC)
French justice does not have a guilty plea or plea bargaining as in common law, but the CRPC allows the prosecutor to offer a reduced sentence of up to one year in prison or half of the maximum penalty if the defendant admits the offense. Introduced in 2004 and later extended to almost all § délits, by 2012 it was 13% of délit prosecutions. See also § coupable.
compétence
jurisdiction.
Usage:
avoir compétence – exercise jurisdiction
clause d'attribution des compétences – jurisdiction clause
compétences d'attribution – special jurisdiction
compétence exclusive – Sole jurisdiction
se déclarer compétent – accept jurisdiction
se déclarer incompétent – Decline jurisdiction
décliner la compétence du tribunal – to take a plea against the jurisdiction of the court
juge compétent – judge having jurisdiction
relever de la compétence de – to fall under the jurisdiction of
compétent 
(of a court): having the appropriate jurisdiction to investigate and try a given type of § infraction. See also § présomption d'innocence.
 False friend warning: this is *not* the same as the English term "competent" in the sense of legally of sound mind, which in French is rendered by § capacité juridique.
complice
accomplice
complicité correspective
analysis in which the § coauteur (joint principal) is also ispo facto an accomplice
complot
conspiracy (see also: § association de malfaiteurs)
condamnation
conviction. In criminal matters, it is a court decision/verdict declaring a person § coupable (guilty) of committing an § infraction and imposing a § peine (sentence).
condamnation avec sursis
suspended sentence. A sentence that the convicted person is excused from having to serve, unless found guilty for some other offense within five years.
condamnation définitive
A conviction becomes final when all recourses have been exhausted (e.g., appeal). It cannot be challenged unless the trial is reviewed.
condamnation par défaut
Conviction resulting from a trial in absentia of a person without representation and who was not aware of the date of the § audience (hearing). Compare § plainte contre X.
condamné
convicted person; A person who has been found guilty of an § infraction (offense) by a § condamnation définitive (final decision) and upon whom a § sanction (penalty) is imposed.
confiscation d'un objet
confiscation of an asset
conseil d'État
The Conseil d'État, or Council of state, is the supreme court of the § ordre administratif (administrative order). This is not part of criminal law, which is under the § ordre judiciaire.
consentement
Consent
considérant que
phrase used to introduce part of a judgement; similar to "§ whereas"
consommation
commission (in non-legal contexts: consumption, intake, use of)
constat
official report
constatation
finding, proof
contrainte
constraint
contrainte pénale
a new type of probationary sentence for délits, created in 2014 as a result of the conférence de consensus (Consensus Commission) established by justice minister Christiane Taubira to reduce recidivism.
contravention
A non-criminal offense (such as a parking ticket) is a minor offense judged by the police court. The offender is liable to a fine and/or a penalty that deprives or restricts his rights, such as suspension of the driver's license, a ban on issuing checks,  etc. One of three types of criminal offenses (§ infraction), the others being § délit and § crime.
contrôle judiciaire
Judicial supervision. A penal measure ordered by the § juge d'instruction or the § juge des libertés et de la détention (liberty and custody judge) pending trial. The convicted person is subject to certain obligations (answering summonses from the § SPIP, a prohibition on meeting certain people or frequenting certain places, § obligation de soins (court-ordered treatment) etc. and may benefit, depending on his or her situation, from social support. See § suivi judiciaire.
contrôle restreinte
judicial review
contumace
contempt of court
copie exécutoire
See § grosse.
coupable

(adjective) guilty.
(noun) guilty person. There is no guilty plea in French criminal law. A defendant may confess to a crime, but this becomes one more piece of evidence that can be used against them. Plea bargaining does not exist. But see: § comparution sur reconnaissance préalable de culpabilité.
coups et blessures volontaires
crime of intentionally injuring another
cour
Court.
Usage note: cour and § tribunal both mean "court", but there is a hierarchy between them: tribunal is a court of § instance, whereas a § cour is an appeals court. Further, different terms are used for their rulings: a § tribunal gives a § jugement, whereas a cour renders an § arrêt.
Cour d'appel
court of appeal
Cour d'assises
court that tries the most serious offenses. The court having jurisdiction over § crime, composed of three professional judges and six jurors. In principle, it is situated in the chief town of the department or in the seat of the court of appeal if there is one in the department. Appeals against conviction verdicts (§ condamnation) handed down by an Assize Court are reviewed by another Assize Court composed of three professional judges and nine jurors.
Cour d'assises de mineurs
court that tries serious offenses by minors
Cour de cassation
court that hears final appeals on points of law only. The supreme court of the § ordre judiciaire, dealing within the 'ordinary' courts, located in Paris. Its role is not to retry a case, but to check that court decisions have been rendered in accordance with the rules of law. An appeal before this court is called a § pourvoi en cassation.
§ pays de droit coutumier,
a usage held to be obligatory by the social order, as if it were the result of a law. It is formed by the accumulation of precedents.
Usage:
Droit coutumier en France – law based on custom; dating to the Middle Ages and referring mainly to the Ancien Régime. See § pays de droit coutumier
a saying: "une fois n'est pas coutume" –  "once is not a coutume".
CPP
See § Code de procédure pénale
CRPC
See § comparution sur reconnaissance préalable de culpabilité.
crime 
serious offense; serious crime; an offense judged by a § court of assizes. The penalty is more than 10 years imprisonment and the fine is at least 75,000 euros.
Translation note: Despite the obvious cognate, there is no wide agreement on how to translate crime into English, and in the context of the penal code, the English word crime is rarely if ever used. Translator Edward Tomlinson chose the words felony. See the Translation note at § délit.
crime contre l'humanite
crime against humanity
crime de guerre
war crime
culpabilité
guilt. See § coupable.


=== D ===

déchéance
disqualification Loss of a right as a penalty, or because of non-compliance with conditions governing its exercise. Example: loss of civic rights following a criminal conviction.
décision de justice
A written summary of the case, representing the resolution adopted by the court and the reasoning that led to it. Compare: § arrêt, § jugement, § ordonnance, and § relaxe. See also: § cour.
décision de relaxe
acquittal See § relaxe.
décision de renvoi
decision to send the defendant for trial See § renvoi.
décolation
decapitation
décret

A decree, which, according to Article 37 of the Constitution is a regulation that may be issued by the government in any area that is not within the scope specifically assigned to Parliament. See also: § arrêté, § hierarchie des normes.
a type of § règlement (regulation) which is issued by the Prime Minister or the President A décret is subject to § recours en annulation (judicial review) by the § Conseil d'État (Council of State. Contrast: § arrêté.
In the § hiérarchie des normes, a décret is below a § loi and above an § arrêté.
Background:  Historically, the word décret has undergone numerous changes of meaning since its use under the Ancien régime, where it meant an arrest warrant. During the Constitutional monarchy (1789–92), it took on the new meaning of a text from the legislative branch. In the Constitution of 1795 the term was replaced by résolution. It reappeared in the Napoleonic era with the meaning of a text promulgated by the head of state, disappearing and reappearing again several times with various senses, until it finally took its current meaning in the Constitution of 1848. Until the end of the Third Republic, a décret could  be issued only by the head of state; in the Third Republic and Fourth Republic the head of government also had this power.
décret-loi
§ décret-loi (plural: décrets-lois), an exceptional power of the executive during the post-WWI crisis period of the Third Republic. Décrets-lois were enabling measures taken during the interwar period expanding the powers of the executive to balance the budget and protect the monetary system. Although subject to parliamentary ratification, they were seen as having the force of law. This ability of the executive to create law was abrogated in the Constitution of the Fourth Republic in 1946, and then resurrected in the § loi d'habilitation provision of the 1958 Constitution of the Fifth Republic.
défaut criminel
Literally 'criminal default', a judgment by default describes the court procedure by which a criminal trial may proceed, even in the absence of the defendant.
défendeur
defendant. See also: § accusé, § auteur, § inculpé, § intimé, § prévenu.
se deféndre
to defend oneself
défit
wrongful conduct
délai de prescription
See § prescription.
délation
a § denonciation considered vile and despicable
délictuel 
adjectival form of § délit, meaning: that which constitutes a délit, or is characteristic of a délit. Also: délictuelle, délictueux, délictueuse.
Example:  "Un délit est une infraction punie d'une peine délictuelle" ⟶ A délit is an offense punishable by a criminal ("delictuel") punishment."
délit
A middle-ranking criminal offense judged by a § tribunal correctionnel (correctional court). In the tripartite division of § infractions (offenses), it is of intermediate seriousness between a § contravention (minor) and a § crime (major). The maximum sentence is ten years, minimum is a 3750 Euro fine. Alternative sentences include community service (§ travail d'intérêt général), a citizenship workshop (§ stage de citoyenneté), or additional penalties.
Usage note: in informal language, may mean any offense. The adjectival form is § delictuel, delictueux, -euse.
Translation note: There is no agreement in English sources about how to refer to délit in English. The tripartite division of § infractions in French law does not line up well with concepts in common law, and translations of délit into English vary greatly. Some terms seen include: felony, major offense, intermediate offense, minor offense, minor crime, and misdemeanor. Many English sources describe the term on first appearance, and then just refer to it using the French term after that. Note that the English cognate delict exists (see Delict) but that word is rarely used in English to represent the French term.
Edward Tomlinson described the problem in the Transator's Preface to his 1999 translation of the 1994 Penal code. Tomlinson chose the words felony, misdemeanor, and petty infraction for the French terms § crime, délit, and § contravention. He points out how inexact the correspondence is between the French and English terms, and that délit has a broad range of possible penalties which at high end can be ten years imprisonment, which is well within the range of felonies in the common law system.
délit materièl
a major offense which only requires as a mens rea that the defendant's conduct be voluntary
démande en justice
legal claim; court petition; plaintiff's claim.
déni de justice
miscarriage of justice; refusal of a jurisdiction to judge a case. Contrast: § principe d'opportunité des poursuites.
dénoncer
Literally: to denounce. When notice of an § infraction (offense) is given to the police or to the § procureur (public prosecutor's office) by a third party, the verb used is dénoncer, and the notice is a dénonciation. Compare: § porter plainte.
se dépêcher sur les lieux
See § lieu du crime.
déportation
deportation
dépositaire de la force publique
law enforcement officer
déposition
Testimony given before a court, magistrate, gendarme or police officer.
Usage note: déposer en justice  ⟶ to give evidence in court
détention
detention See also § emprisonnement and § réclusion.
détention provisoire
remand in custody.
a measure ordered by the § juge des libertés et de la détention at the request of the § juge d'instruction (investigating judge). The latter may request that a person under investigation for a § crime or § délit punishable by at least three years' imprisonment be placed in prison *before* trial. The § détention provisoire (pre-trial detention) must be strictly substantiated according to the conditions provided by law.
détenu
A person incarcerated in a penitentiary by court order.
détournement
misappropriation; the act of dispossessing someone of something of value which was entrusted to them in confidence. Can be a civil or professional offense, or a criminal offense. Among the latter, it constitutes the § élément matériel of § délits such as § abus de confiance.  See also: § abus. Some subtopics:
Détournement de biens par un dépositaire public (CP 432-15)
détournement de fonds, a confidence scheme involving fraudulent appropriation of funds
détournement de mineur, removing a minor from the adults having authority over them; kidnapping (CP 227-7)
détournement d'objet donné en gage, removal of a security or collateral intended for a creditor (CP 314-5)
détournement d'objet saisi moving (hiding) an object for which confiscation has been ordered (CP 314-6)
détournement de pouvoir, when a public official goes beyond their remit, in order to achieve a goal not within the authority of their position. (such acts are nullified, and not a criminal offense) See § abus de pouvoir.
détournement de procédure, when a public official uses a technique envisioned by law for one specific purpose, for a different one, in order to get around some judicial obstacle and attain some other goal. (a civil, not a criminal offense)
detournement de fonds
embezzlement.
Usage note: détourner  ⟶ to misappropriate; détournement ⟶ misappropriation
diligences
care
dispositif
court's finding (stated at the end of the decision)
The dispositif of a § décision de justice (court decision) is the last part of a judgment or ruling that describes the resolution of the dispute and is binding on the parties.
doctrine
academic writing, learned opinion, the writing of leading authorities
d'office
ex officio; by virtue of their office. The ability of a public official to act on their own accord, rather than by request of someone.
Usage note: depending on context, could be translated as 'automatically', 'by virtue of their office', 'acting on their own initiative'.
dol
fault; 
a fraudulent scheme to deceive another person in order to obtain their consent Compare confidence game.
Specific forms:
dol aggravé ⟶ additional mens rea beyond § dol général or § dol spécial special intention
dol dépassé ⟶ the repercussions of the act go beyond the intention of, or the foreseeable outcome by the defendant. See Preterintention.
dol éventuel ⟶ oblique or indirect intention; See also § intention.
dol général ⟶ Deliberate commission of a criminal act, while having foreknowledge that the act is prohibited by law and has criminal sanctions.
dol imprécis ⟶  See § dol indéterminé.
dol indéterminé ⟶  where a person acts intending a certain result, but without being able to foresee the actual outcome
dol spécial ⟶  criminal intent.  There is dol spécial, or criminal intent, when the perpetrator of an act that threatens an interest protected by criminal law does so with the intention of damaging that interest.
droit
the law: an abstract term for 'the law' (as opposed to § loi, which is an individual law); a set of rules governing life in society.
a right (as in, the right to do something; human rights): the prerogatives attributed to an individual.
In other contexts:
a fee or duty
right (adj.; as opposed to left)
straight (ligne droite; straight line)
droit civil
Civil law. One of the two branches of § droit privé (private law), the other being § droit pénal (criminal law).  Includes the fields of § droit commercial (commercial law), droit social (welfare law), (droit judiciaire privé) civil procedure, and others
droit coutumier
See § pays de droit coutumier, and § coutume.
droit écrit
Literally, "written law". In a traditional sense, mostly used in the expression § pays de droit écrit ("land of written law") referring to the south of France in the context of the development of law in France during the Middle Ages. In a more modern sense, refers to documents such as the § Constitution, statutes (§ lois), regulations (§ réglements), and § ordonnances which are defined and delineated in the Constitution.
droit impératif
Also, régle impérative; closely related to § ordre public, this is a law of guidance for the citizen that has a higher level of compulsion than § droit supplétif and may not be overridden.
droit pénal
criminal law. Criminal law is "the set of legal rules that govern the State's response to offenses and offenders". Droit pénal deals with an individual's rights and obligations under the law, as codified in a criminal code (§ code pénal). Under French criminal law, the criminal code (defines what acts (or omissions) are punishable. Contrast § procédure pénale.
droit positif
Positive law
droit privé
private law, concerned with the rights between private individuals. In Montesquieu's words: "laws concerning the relationship that all citizens have with each other". One half of § dualisme juridictionnel (jurisdictional dualism).
All the rules that concern the acts and lives of individuals or of § personnes morales (legal persons; i.e., private legal entities, such as companies or associations). Contrast: § droit public.
droit public
public law; pertains to the relationship between the government and the governed. One half of   § dualisme juridictionnel (jurisdictional dualism).
the relationship between the State and the individual, or the organization of the state
All the rules concerning the organization and operation of the State, local authorities, and administration, as well as their relations with private persons. Contrast: § droit privé.
droit supplétif
Also régle supplétive; closely related to § ordre public, this is a law of guidance for the citizen that is presumed to be followed in the absence of evidence to the contrary; a default course of action which may, however, be overridden under explicit circumstances. Contrast with § droit impératif, which has a higher level of compulsion and may not be overridden.
dualisme juridictionnel

Jurisdictional dualism in France, Lit., "jurisdictional duality";  consists in the existence of two separate jurisdictional systems, or "orders of jurisdiction": the § ordre administratif (administrative order) corresponding to public law (§ droit public) and the § ordre judiciaire (judicial order) corresponding to private law (§ droit privé), headed respectively by the § Conseil d'État (Council of State) for administrative law, and the § Cour de cassation (Court of Cassation) for judicial law (with conflicts of jurisdiction between the two handled by the § Tribunal des conflits). This jurisdictional separation resulted from a long political and administrative history, and is now constitutionally protected.


=== E ===

écartèlement
dismemberment. An extremely brutal punishment resulting in death. Used during the Ancien Régime, and usually reserved for regicide. Abolished by the penal code of 1791 during the French Revolution.
École nationale de la magistrature (ENM)
the National Judicial Academy in Bordeaux,  responsible for educating judges.
écrou
A § procès verbal (written legal act) that a person has been turned over to a prison warden for detention, including the name of the inmate, the date, and the reasons for incarceration. An act of committal; a legal document drawn up for any person who is taken to a penitentiary establishment or who presents himself there voluntarily.
In other contexts: a hardware nut.

effraction
breaking (of a lock, door, fence, or other barrier to an enclosed area)
Usage notes:
entrée par effraction ⟶ entrance by force break-in
entrer par effraction ⟶ to break in
pénétrer par effraction ⟶ breaking and entering
vol par effraction  ⟶ burglary
égalité devant la loi
equality before the law.
élément intellectuel
Another name for § élément moral
élément matériel
the actus reus of an offense (lit.: material element). This is the visible, external part of the offense, i.e., the actions involved in carrying out a criminal act. Contrast: § élément moral.
élément moral
the mens rea of an offense (lit.: 'guilty mind'); i.e., the psychological attitude of the perpetrator towards the commission of the acts deemed to be punishable by criminal law. The perpetrator may have acted with intent, or through recklessness or negligence. Also known as § élément intellectuel, and § élément psychologique. Contrast: § élément matériel. See also: § dol général, § dol spécial, § intention, and § causes de non-imputabilité.
élément psychologique
Another name for § élément moral
éléments
In context, éléments by itself can mean any of the related multi-word terms, especially § éléments de preuve (evidence).
éléments d'appréciation
information; criteria; background info; key aspects; indications; evidence; considerations.
éléments de preuve
evidence.
empire
See also: § agir sous l'empire de.
empreinte génétique
The genetic characteristics permitting an individual to be identified. See also: § FNAEG.
emprisonnement
imprisonment. See also § détention and § réclusion.
emprisonnement à perpétuité
life imprisonment. See § réclusion criminelle à perpétuité.
encourir une peine
incur a punishment

enfreindre les prohibitions légales
to break the law
enlèvement
abduction; kidnapping
en matière correctionnelle
for major offenses; in cases involving major offenses
enquête de flagrance
expedited investigation (with extended powers) of recently committed offenses (within 16 days). Compare § enquête préliminaire.
the police investigation implemented in cases of flagrance, i.e. a restrictive definition of flagrante delicto.
enquête officieuse
Old name for § enquête préliminaire.
enquête préliminaire
ordinary police investigation (without special powers). Compare § enquête de flagrance.
an investigation by the judicial police
enquête de police
police investigation

entraver
impede
Équipes régionales d'intervention et de sécurité (ERIS)
Special forces of the prison administration system who intervene in case of serious tensions at a prison. It is composed of about forty specially trained and equipped surveillance personnel who attempt to prevent incidents from escalating, participate in general searches and restore order if necessary.
ERIS
See § Équipes régionales d'intervention et de sécurité.
erreur d'appréciation
error of judgment;  erreur manifeste d'appréciation ⟶ manifest error of judgment
erreur sur le droit
error of law
escroquerie
fraud
essorillement
cropping; removal of a person's ears as a physical punishment. See § mutilation, § peine afflictive et infamante.
état de droit
rule of law (lit. "state of law"). État de droit is one of many ways that the principle of "rule of law" is rendered in French, including: prééminence du droit,  primauté du droit, principe de droit, régime de droit, règne du droit, respect de la loi, principe de légalité, or communauté de droit. Although there is debate about the point, there is a general consensus that état de droit and rule of law are equivalent.
état civil
literally 'civil status', but no equivalent in English law. Designates a range of characteristics of a person that define both rights and duties based on age, nationality, parentage, adoption, premature majority (émancipation). These are kept in a special records office presided over by the officier de l'état civil.
étatique
derived from the state
être astreinte aux obligations du contrôle judiciaire
to be subjected to conditional bail
être assimilé à une arme 
to be classed as a weapon
être astreinte aux obligations du contrôle judiciaire
to be subjected to conditional bail
être poursuivi
to be prosecuted
être puni de
to be punished with
être reconnu coupable
to be found guilty
exercer l'action publique
to bring a prosecution; see § action publique.


=== F ===

fait incriminé
criminal conduct
fait justificatif
See § justification.
faute caracterisée
established fault
faute contraventionnelle
the mens rea of minor offenses
faute d'imprudence
carelessness
faux témoignage
False testimony. Perjury is a very serious offense, since it undermines not only one of the parties to trial, but also the moral authority of justice. If it is committed for money, it is considered to be  corruption.
fers
imprisoned; [condemned to] forced labor (§ travaux forcés);  literally: "irons". (antiquated) Not to be confused with § marque au fer rouge.
Usage notes: Jeter quelqu'un dans les fers, le retenir dans les fers; mettre aux fers.
an old punishment, defined in the French Penal Code of 1791 and retained in the Code des délits et des peines (Code of Offences and Penalties).
flagellation
whipping, or flagellation; a type of corporal punishment under the Ancien régime. See § peine afflictive et infamante.
flagrant délit
A crime in progress, or having just been committed; in flagrante delicto. If punishable by a prison term, the § parquet can bring the accused rapidly before the judge in a § comparution immédiate in order to be judged. See also § enquête de flagrance.
flétrissure
branding. A type of corporal punishment under the Ancien régime. See § peine afflictive et infamante.
FNAEG
The Fichier national automatisé des empreintes génétiques is a national system for managing the data about genetic traces of  those convicted of certain crimes (rape, murder, drug-dealing) as well as those suspected of those crimes with strong evidence, in order to facilitate the identification and apprehension of perpetrators.
fol appel
See § appel.
fond
refers to the issues of fact in a case upon which the judge rules. See also: § jugement; contrast: § forme.
Usage:
droit pénal de fond – that part of criminal code which defines substantive issues.
sur le fond – in a French court judgment, means based on the substantive issues involved.
force exécutoire
that which can be enforced, if necessary, by the public force (Example: a judgment). Certain ordinances, notably administrative or notarial, can also be enforceable.
force majeure
An unforeseen, insurmountable event beyond a person's control that may relieve someone of legal responsibility for certain acts.
Usage note: often seen as cas de force majeure.
force publique
law enforcement; police. See also § agent de la force publique.
forclusion
Loss of a right which was not exercised within the prescribed time limit. Example: expiration of the time allowed to appeal a case.
forme
refers to the procedural issues in a case upon which the judge rules. See also: § jugement; contrast: § fond.
Usage:
droit pénal de forme – that part of criminal code which defines the procedures and jurisdictional issues.
sur le forme – in a French court judgment, means based on the procedural issues involved.
former un pourvoi
See § pourvoi.
formule
A boilerplate text serving as a model which can be used to draft legal documents of the same type. Example: a formule de testament is a boilerplate draft which can be used as a starting point for drawing up a testament.
formule exécutoire
the wording affixed by the § greffier (clerk) at the bottom of the copy of a court decision (judgment or ruling) intended for the party that won the case, to enable them to proceed with enforcement. This enforceable copy is called the "§ grosse".

fouille
search
Usage notes:
une fouille corporelle, or  une fouille à corps: body search, personal search.
fouille des bagages: baggage search
fouiller : to frisk
in other contexts (plural only): fouilles: excavations, archaeological dig
frapper quelqu'un d'une peine
to impose a punishment on someone
frauduleux
with guilty intent. See also § intention frauduleuse.
fuite
escape


=== G ===

galères
A sentence of travail forcé (forced labor) as a galley slave (galérien), as a type of punishment under the Ancien régime. See § peine afflictive et infamante.
garde à vue (GAV)
arrest; police custody during a police investigation. Normally, the detention lasts a maximum 24 hours; covered in § CPP article 62-2. Formerly, garde à vue applied to witnesses as well.
Usage note: mis[e] en garde à vue or placé[e] en garde à vue ⟶ "held in [police] custody", "taken into custody", "placed under arrest"
Garde des sceaux
An alternate name for the § ministère de la justice (Minister of Justice).  The Keeper of the Seals is a title held by the Minister of Justice. The Minister guards the Great Seal of France in their office. The Seal was used in 1958 to seal the Constitution of France. See also: § scellés.
Gendarmerie Nationale
National Gendarmerie. One of the two main corps of § police judiciaire, comprising two groups: the departmental gendarmerie, and the mobile gendarmerie. Compare National Police.
gens de loi
practicing lawyers; the legal community
grand tableau
official roll (of § avocats). Literally: "large table".
greffe
Registrar services of a court staffed by court officers who help the magistrates. The registry is directed by the chief registrar.
Usage: droit de greffe: registrar fee (e.g., for copies); greffe d'instance: regional court registry; greffer: to be an adjunct of; 
greffier
a judicial clerk; court clerk. Auxiliary officers who perform clerical duties, draw up documents, and ensure their authenticity and safekeeping. All informational acts by a § juge d'instruction must be performed with the assistance of his clerk.
grosse
A copy of a court decision bearing the § formule exécutoire, a draft of the order necessary to enforce it. The name derives from the fact that it in earlier times, the person delivering it was paid by the page, so it was to their advantage to write it in large letters to increase the number of pages and thus earn a higher fee. Now better known as the § copie exécutoire.


=== H ===

haute justice
highest of three levels of § justice seigneuriale under the Ancien régime
hauteur
á toute hauteur de la procédure ⟶ at any stage of the proceedings
heures légales
legal hours; hours in which process may be served (7 a.m. – 9 p.m.) and judgments executed
hiérarchie des normes

hierarchy of norms, or hierarchy of laws. An analysis which views laws as occupying a hierarchy in which laws base their validity upon a higher level norm, and so on, forming a hierarchy, such that laws are validated in a regression of validity ending in the Constitution. The notion was first developed by Hans Kelsen in his Pure Theory of Law and the hierarchy concept is often referred to in French legal texts. Often visualized as "Kelsen's pyramid".
homicide
homicide 
homicide volontaire
voluntary homicide
homicide involuntaire
involuntary homicide; voluntary manslaughter
huissier
bailiff, sheriff, process-server. a ministerial officer charged with writing certain documents, and implementing certain acts or judiciary decisions. Some functions are similar to that of an authorized bailiff, or an official process server authorized by the government.


=== I ===

immobilisation d'un objet
freezing of assets
impossibilité materielle
physical impossibility
imprudence
imprudence
impunité
impunity
imputabilité
The possibility of attributing an act to someone or something; blameworthiness, or the ability of someone to recognize their action as being unlawful. See also: § non-imputabilité, § élément moral, § aliénation mentale partielle
imputation
imputation is the action of attributing an action to a person
Usage note:
imputation diffamatoire – defamatory allegation; innuendo
inappellable
see § inattaquable
inattaquable
not subject to appeal, unchallengeable
incapacité
incapacity, disability, disqualification
of a private person: someone deprived—by law or by court order—of the enjoyment or exercise of certain rights. This is the case for minors or protected adults (majeurs protégés).
Usage notes:
incapacité d'ester en justice ⟶ lack of standing before the court
incapacité d'exercice ⟶ incapacity to exercise one's own rights without assistance; absence of legal capacity
fr:incapacité permanente ⟶ permanent disability
incarcération
imprisonment
incendiaire
arsonist
incendie volontaire
arson
incitation
Usage notes:
incitation au crime ⟶ incitement to commit a felony
fr:Incitation à la haine ⟶ incitement to ethnic or racial hatred
incitation au faux témoignage ⟶ subornation of perjury
incompétence 
lack of jurisdiction. Inability of a court to hear a case for reasons relating either to the nature of the case (e.g., the § tribunal correctionnel cannot try § crime (major crimes) ), or to the nature of the person involved (e.g., the correctional court cannot try minors), or to the geographical location of one or more of the parties (e.g., the correctional court cannot try an offense committed outside its § ressort (geographical jurisdiction) by a perpetrator who lives outside the jurisdiction) See also: compétent.
Usage notes:
déclaration d'incompétence ⟶ finding of lack of jurisdiction
incompétence a raison du lieu ⟶ lack of jurisdiction ratione loci such as the defendant's place of residence
se déclarer incompétent ⟶ refuse jurisdiction
incompétent ⟶ lacking jurisdiction
in concreto
subjective
inconduite
misconduct, immorality
incriminé
Usage notes:
décision incriminé ⟶ decision appealed against; decision of the court below
fait incriminé ⟶ offense charged; matter being complained of
jugement incriminé ⟶ judgement being appealed
inculpation
See § mise en examen.
inculpé
accused, defendant, person charged with a criminal offense. See also: § accusé, § auteur, § défendeur, § intimé, § prévenu.
indicateur
Informant, informer; someone who provides privileged information to law. enforcement. Also: informateur.
indices
clues. Traces, items, or material circumstances, which can be examined objectively and which may shed light on certain facts surrounding the commission of an offense.
individualisation des peines
a principle recognized by a decision of the Conseil constitutionnel (Constitutional Council (France) as deriving from article 8 of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen.
infamie
Infamie (disgrace) is a decision, action or omission that undermines a person's reputation, taints his honor, or stains him with dishonor. Doucet I-6. Roman law, and Ancient law after it, recognized the judicial decision of infamy, which subjected the person concerned to certain social degradations. This type of sanction can work with people concerned with their honor and reputation.
See § peine infamante.
information judiciaire
preliminary investigation; the phase of criminal proceedings that precedes a judgment and during which the § juge d'instruction, under the control of the § Chambre de l'instruction (Investigating Chamber), carries out research to establish the truth, gathers and assesses evidence, hears the persons involved or being prosecuted and the witnesses, and decides whether or not to charge a person (mettre en examen) and what action to take: See § instruction préparatoire.
informateur
See § indicateur.
infraction 
Offense. conduct prohibited by the criminal law and punishable by a penalty specified in the law. Offenses are divided into three categories: § contravention, § délit. § crime. Offenses are usually reported to the police, but may also be reported directly to the § ministère public (public prosecutor's office). See also: § porter plainte, § dénoncer, § sanction pénale
infraction contre un bien
offense against property
infraction contre la personne
offense against a person
infraction criminelle
a serious offense; a crime. Narrower in meaning than "criminal offense" in English, which can cover a variety of offenses from very serious to petty.  See § crime, which also has a narrower meaning than English "crime", and § infraction.
infraction flagrante
offense giving rise to an expedited investigation
infraction formelle
complete offense that does not require a result
infraction matérielle
offense which only requires as a mens rea that the defendant's conduct be voluntary. The nearest UK equivalent is a strict liability offense.
infraction pénale
criminal offense
An offense is a behavior strictly forbidden by criminal law and sanctioned by a penalty provided for by it. Infractions are divided into three types; from most to least serious, they are: § crime, § délit, and § contravention. The English cognate infraction is less often used for this, and in fact is more often seen as the translation of contravention, as in Tomlinson's use of petty infraction to translate § contravention.
injonction thérapeutique
A measure ordered against a person convicted of a § crime or § délit, particularly in the case of a sexual or drug offense. It is pronounced by a magistrate after expert medical advice and upon the agreement of the convict. The convicted person then undergoes medical treatment and monitoring by a doctor.

injustifié
unjustified

inquisitoire
inquisitorial See § procédure inquisitoire.
instance
A dispute brought before a court of law, as well as the entirety of the proceedings, from the initial petition to the judgment. In principle, in the event of an appeal, the case gives rise to new instance, or set of proceedings before another court. The initial petition takes place before a court of first instance, and if appealed, that would be a court of second instance.
instruction
pre-trial investigation; judicial investigation; the investigative procedure in which a § juge d'instruction gathers evidence about the commission of an offense and decides on referral to the trial court of the accused parties. See also § instruction préparatoire.
instruction préparatoire
Also known as information judiciaire, or just information, this is the phase of criminal proceedings in which the § juge d'instruction uses all the means to gather everything necessary to establish the truth of the matter (expert reports, searches, hearings, confrontations), so the court can make an informed decision. The judge investigates evidence for and against the accused, i.e. he gathers all the elements in favor and against the accused. See also: § mise en examen, § témoin assisté, § commission rogatoire, § détention provisoire, § contrôle judiciaire, § juge des libertés et de la détention
instruit à charge et à décharge
investigate the charges and the defense; gather evidence both for and against; searches for incriminating and exculpatory evidence
intention
intention See also: § dol éventuel, § élément moral, § responsabilité pénale.
Intention frauduleuse ⟶ guilty intent

interdiction
banning
interjeter appel
See § appel.
interrompre l'execution d'une infraction
prevent the commission of an offense
intimé
respondent; party who is the defendant in an § appel (appeal proceeding). See also: See also: § accusé, § auteur, § défendeur, § inculpé, § intimé, § prévenu.
intime conviction
personal conviction
irrecevabilité
Impossibility for a court to study a request for justice, on the grounds that it does not respect the conditions required by law, whether they are a question of form (e.g., the time limit of the procedure not being respected) or of substance (e.g., a person claiming to be a victim does not provide proof of the alleged damage).
irresponsabilité pénale
Provisions of the law which exonerate a perpetrator from criminal responsibility for an offense and therefore exclude any conviction against him, in cases such as mental disorder, duress, self-defense, state of necessity. See § causes de non-imputabilité, § élément moral, § libre arbitre.


=== J ===

JAP
See § juge de l'application des peines.
JLD
See § juge des libertés et de la détention.
jonction
Fusion of two dossiers by a judge when they are sufficiently related, and one ruling suffices for both.
jour-amende
day-fine
juge de l'application des peines (JAP)
probation judge; The judge responsible for supervising the implementation of prison sentences (leave, § libération conditionnelle (parole), semi-liberty, § bracelet électronique (electronic surveillance) with the goal of § réinsertion (reintegration into society) and the prevention of § récidive (recidivism). They review the sentence, assess the offender's employment and family situation, and any efforts they have made to make amends or reparations, and may decide on a different penalty than the one received at trial. See also: § tribunal de l'application des peines.
juge
judge, court. By metonymy, it may also be used to mean courts in general.
juge délegué
a judicial post that existed briefly between two reforms in 1993 before being abolished; was responsible for deciding whether to put someone into § détention provisoire 
juge des libertés et de la détention (JLD)
judge responsible for deciding whether to place someone in § détention provisoire (pre-trial detention) or grant bail. Created by the 2000 § loi Guigou on the § présomption d'innocence (presumption of innocence).
juge d'instruction
Investigating judge. In criminal procedure, the magistrate in charge of gathering all the elements of an offense. In charge of the most complex criminal cases (mandatory for § crime (serious crimes) and optional for § délits (lesser crimes).) Directs the investigation and as such gives instructions to the police and gendarmes. Can put a person under investigation and place him under § contrôle judiciaire judicial supervision, or request that he be remanded in custody by the § juge des libertés et de la détention (JLD). Gathers evidence considered useful for establishing the truth, directs the interrogations, confrontations and hearings, and puts together the dossier that will be submitted to the § tribunal correctionnel (criminal court) or the § cour d'assise (court of assizes) for trial. The juge d'instruction handles about 2% of cases; the other 98% are under the § procureur.
juge du fond
judge dealing with law and fact; a court of first instance
jugement
a finding, ruling, or judgment; narrowly, a term for a decision by a court of first instance; more generally, a term for any decision by one or more judges. Compare: § arrêt, § décision de justice, § ordonnance, § relaxe. See also: § cour.
juger
to judge.
Usage notes:
juger en connaissance de cause ⟶ make an informed decision.
juré
juror.
In other contexts: "sworn", from the past participle of jurer.
juridiction
The collective name for a court or judicial body.
 False friend warning: this is *not* the same as the English term "jurisdiction", for which the French term is § compétence.
juridiction administrative
See § ordre administratif.
juridiction judiciaire
See § ordre judiciaire.
juridiction pénale
criminal court See also § ordre judiciaire.
juridiction répressive
criminal court  See also § ordre judiciaire.
jurisprudence
case law
jury
jury. A jury is used only in the case of a § crime.
justice
The French judicial system comes down from the French Revolution of 1789, and is based on principles and on written law voted in § Parlement (French Parliament) by elected deputies and senators. The justice system depends on the Civil code, the Penal code and all laws, including European and international texts. The Constitution affirms the independence of the judiciary from the § pouvoir exécutif (lit. 'executive power'; Government) and from the § pouvoir législatif (lit. 'legislative power'; Parliament).
Usage note: saisir la justice ⟶ go to court, file a case, bring legal proceedings. See § saisir.
justice seigneuriale
Feudal manorial justice (justice seigneuriale) was a medieval mode of organization of the judicial system in most of Europe in the Middle Ages. Seigniorial courts in the kingdom of France numbered around 20,000 on the eve of the Revolution, and constituted the basis of judicial organization, along with the provosts' courts (prévôtés, subordinate royal courts) which were abolished in the middle of the eighteenth century.
justification
Justification. A criminal defense where the defendant claims to have done nothing wrong because the fact of committing the crime promoted some social interest or asserted a right of such importance as to outweigh any wrongfulness of the crime.
Usage note: fait justificatif ⟶ such a defense; justification; objective defense


=== KL ===

larcin
theft of low value
Etymological note:
The English word larceny derives from the 13th century French larrecin or larcin meaning "theft, robbery".
légitime défense
A person is deemed to be acting in self-defense when they respond to an immediate and unjustified attack on their person, another person or their property, provided that the means of defense are proportional to the gravity of the attack. In this case, the person is not held criminally responsible for the harm that they may have caused in self-defense.
légitement 
legally
lettre de remission
pardon
libération conditionnelle
A sentence adjustment, under the supervision of the § juge de l'application des peines (sentence enforcement judge), for convicts who show serious efforts at social rehabilitation. Similar to parole, or early release for good behavior.
libération sur parole
parole. A prisoner is paroled (French: libéré sur parole, lit. 'liberated on their word')  when he is allowed to leave the place of detention under the sole condition of respecting certain commitments taken on honor. This term is mostly obsolete in modern France, except in some military contexts. It is similar to what is now called § libération conditionnelle.
liberté surveillée
a security measure taken against a juvenile offender who is placed under the supervision of an educator appointed by the juvenile judge.
libre arbitre
free will. A philosophical concept going back at least to Aristotle, and to Augustine in theological discussions about who has responsibility for evil acts. A person is said to have free will when they can, of their own volition, control their instincts and impulses, behave rationally, and act in accordance with moral and social laws. Classical criminological doctrine about guilt is based on this concept. From a legislative viewpoint, lawmakers generally presume that adults have free will, leaving it up to judges to determine how individual cases may depart from the general one. If they find that a § prévenu (accused) was under some irresistible constraint that deprived them of free will, a judge may declare them not responsible, given that there is a § cause de non-imputabilité. See moral responsibility, legal responsibility.
lien de causalité
causal link
lieu du crime
scene of the crime 
Usage notes:
se dépêcher sur les lieux ⟶  to hasten to the scene of a crime
se transporter sur les lieux ⟶ to go to the scene of the crime
loi
legislation enacted by § Parliament. Contrast: § décret-loi, § décret.
A law. A written rule of general and impersonal scope. It applies to all without exception. It is discussed, drafted, amended and voted on by the Parlement (Assemblée nationale and Sénat) in identical versions. It is promulgated (officially declared and published) by the § Président de la République and published in the Journal officiel (JO). Once it has been promulgated, a loi is not subject to judicial review of its legality or constitutionality.
a law passed by the legislature in times of peace;  Lois, § réglements, and § ordonnances are constitutionally defined. Lois are subdivided into three: 1) § lois constitutionelles, including the  constitution itself; 2) § lois organiques-establishment, form and function of public powers, used to fill out the constitution but not amend it; and 3) § lois ordinaires, passed by national assembly and Senate, according to § article 34. See also § décret.
The word § loi is used to express written law, (the word législation exists but is less used); loi has a broad meaning, encompassing the Constitution, international treaties, administrative réglements (regulations), etc.; as well as a narrower sense equivalent to English statute, meaning a law passed by the legislature. Loi is distinguished from § régles by having three fundamental properties; they are: 1) general in nature; 2) abstract; and 3) permanent.
A statute; traditionally, it is any law voted on by Parliament. However, § Article 34 of the 1958 Constitution limited Parliament's powers, due to Parliamentary obstructionism in the Fourth Republic, to making laws which are particularly important in the way they affect the State or individuals; everything else is reserved to the government by § Article 37; these are known as § réglements autonomes, to distinguish them from réglements d'exécution des lois, to distinguish them from details about laws already passed by Parliament.
Since the 1958 Constitution, a statute is more constrained than it traditionally was, and Parliament's role is more constrained. Now, a statute must strictly conform to Article 34, otherwise it is within the purview of the government's regulatory power. In addition, where formerly statutes could not be reviewed once promulgated, the Conseil constitutionnel has chipped away at that in reforms since 1958 including establishing the § principes fondamentaux reconnus par les lois de la République including aggregating some power to itself which makes it a bit more analogous to the U.S. Supreme Court, whereas before 1958 Constitutions had less of a fundamental role in determining other laws because there had been so many of them. A fundamental difference between a statute and a regulation, is that a statute must be declared by the President of the Republic and published in the § Journal Officiel, and takes effect the next day.
loi d'habilitation
a new constitutional feature defined in § Article 38 of the 1958 Constitution. The loi d'habilitation is an enabling act in the form of a § loi (statute) which may be issued by § Parliament upon request of the government to temporarily delegate Parliament's constitutional law-making power to the government in a specifically defined subject area and for a specific length of time. While in effect, Parliament is blocked from issuing statutes in that area, and the government is permitted to draw up § ordonnances that normally would be beyond their remit. The ordonnance comes into effect immediately, but must be ratified by Parliament before the end of the period or it expires. Until ratification, the § ordonnance has the same status as a § réglement (regulation), and can therefore be challenged by the § Conseil d'État (Council of State); but after ratification, it takes on the same status as a statute (loi), and can no longer be challenged. In practice, there have been 23 such lois d'habilitation from 1960 to 1990, with effective periods from one month to three and a half years, resulting in 150 ordonnances; about a third of them are subsequently ratified by Parliament.
loi du talion
see § talion.
loi Guigou
see § loi sur la présomption d'innocence
loi ordinaire
a law second in importance, after § loi organique. An ordinary law voted on by Parliament regarding matters specifically ordained to it by the Constitution. See also:  § ordonnance, § règlement.
loi organique
in the hierarchy of laws, this is the most important of three; a law relating to the Constitution. See also: § loi ordinaire, § ordonnance, § règlement.
loi sur la présomption d'innocence
a law of 15 June 2000 which modified the criminal procedure code to protect the rights of individuals under investigation. It also created the new judicial post of § juge des libertés et de la détention. It is mostly the creation of justice minister Élisabeth Guigou under the Jospin administration, and is also known as the loi Guigou. See also § présomption d'innocence.


=== M ===

magistrat
a career magistrate, who can be either a § magistrat debout (standing magistrate), i.e., the § parquet), or one of the sitting judges, either a § juge d'instruction or a trial judge.
magistrature assise
trial judge. Also: juge du siège; literally, the "sitting" judiciary.
magistrature debout
public prosecutors, collectively; branch of the judiciary which addresses the court on behalf of the § ministère public; literally, 'standing judiciary'. See also: § parquet.
magistrature du parquet
public prosecutor's office; the prosecution. See also § ministère public, § parquet, § procureur.
magistrat instructeur
See § juge d'instruction.
magistrat répressif 
criminal court judge. See also: § répressif.
maison centrale
Prison for the most difficult convicts. The detention system is essentially focused on security.
maison d'arrêt
A detention center that receives convicts whose sentence or remaining sentence is two years or less.

maladresse
ineptitude
mandat
an act or warrant by which a magistrate (usually a § juge d'instruction) orders a person to be summoned, arrested, or detained.
mandat d'amener –  order given by a § juge d'instruction to any law enforcement officer to bring a person before them; including with the use of coercive measures if required. Order given by the § juge d'instruction (investigating judge) to the police or § gendarmerie to immediately bring a person under investigation before him, including by force.
mandat d'arrêt – order given by a criminal court judge to any law enforcement officer to search for a person, arrest him or her and take him or her to a detention center
mandat de comparution – notice to appear before a § juge d'instruction on a certain day and time.  The decision of the § juge d'instruction (investigating judge) to give formal notice to an accused person (§ mise en examen) to appear before him. It is a written document delivered by a § huissier de justice (bailiff) or an § agent de la force publique (law enforcement officer).
mandat de dépôt – Order given by a magistrate to the head or director of a penitentiary to receive, or to keep in detention, a person under investigation.
mandat d'exécution  – see § ordre d'exécution.
mandat de perquisition – a "search warrant" does not exist in French law; this expression is only used when talking about foreign legal systems. Not to be confused with mandat de recherche.
mandat de recherche – warrant which may be issued for a person for whom reasonable grounds exist that he may have committed an § infraction. It is the order given to § force publique (police) to search for the person in question and to take him into custody (placer en § garde à vue). added in 2004. Not to be confused with a "search warrant" in common law; see mandat de perquisition.
maniement juridique
judicial transfer
manoeuvre fraduleuse
fraudulent tactic
manquement a une obligation de prudence ou de sécurité
failure to fulfill an obligation of care or of security;
marque au fer rouge
Literally, 'branding with a red hot iron';branding. A type of corporal punishment under the Ancien régime. See § peine afflictive et infamante.
médiation pénale
an alternative measure to criminal proceedings. At the suggestion of the public prosecutor, it brings together the perpetrator and the victim of a criminal offense in the presence of a third party mediator authorized by the justice system. It consists of finding a freely negotiated solution and defining the terms of reparation.
mémoire
brief; Written document addressed to the Court of Cassation or to the administrative courts in which the parties set out their respective claims and arguments.
menace
threat
mesure de sûreté
When a person is dangerous, the judge may decide to apply a penal sanction of a preventive nature, such as therapeutic treatment or placement under mobile electronic surveillance. (See PSEM).
mettre en cause
call into question
meurtre
murder
milieu fermé
lit. "closed environment". In a criminal justice context, "closed custody", "secure unit".
That portion of the prison administration that deals with convicts who remain detained until their term expires. Contrast § milieu ouvert.
In the context of medical treatment: "in-patient"; in other contexts, a milieu fermé could be a ship, or a military regiment;
milieu ouvert
lit. "open environment". In a criminal justice context, "open custody", "non-custodial", "open institution".
That portion of the prison administration system that deals with penalties other than incarceration, such as community service (§ travail d'intérêt général), a citizenship course (§ stage de citoyenneté), work-release (§ semi-liberté), house detention with electronic surveillance (§ bracelet électronique), parole, and others. Contrast: § milieu fermé.
In the context of medical treatment: "out-patient".
mineur
minor
ministère publique
public prosecutor's office; the prosecution; see § magistrature du parquet, § parquet
minorité
The state of someone who is a § mineur (minor).
Ministère de la Justice
The Ministry of Justice is the ministry responsible for the administration of justice, and decides on reforms, and presents bills (§ projet de loi to Parliament. It defines criminal law policy in order to achieve equal treatment of citizens before the law, including monitoring public prosecutor's offices (§ Ministère public; § parquet), manages the courts, and appoints judicial officers—bailiffs (§ huissiers de Justice), notaries (notaires), solicitors (§ avoués), etc.
Ministère public
The ministère public, also known as the § parquet, is the authority which initiates § action publique (criminal proceedings) for § infractions (offenses) causing a disturbance to § ordre public (public order). It represents the interests of society before all courts of law.
The Public Prosecutor's Office. All magistrates working in the courts and tribunals of the § ordre judiciaire (judicial order), responsible for representing the interests of society and ensuring respect for public order and the application of the law. The § ministère public (Public Prosecutor's Office) is hierarchical (§ procureur général (public prosecutor), § procureur (public prosecutor), deputy public prosecutor (§ procureur-adjoint), vice-public prosecutor, and deputy public prosecutor) and subordinate to the Minister of Justice. It does not benefit from lifetime tenure. See § Procureur de la République, § Procureur général, § Poursuites (Prosecution).
mise en accusation
bring charges. A decision by the § juge d'instruction (investigating judge) or the investigating chamber to send a person § mise en examen (indicted) for a crime to the § cour d'assises for trial.
mise en danger deliberée de la personne d'autrui
deliberately putting someone in danger
mise en examen
A criminal charge against an accused (§ accusé) by the investigating judge § juge d'instruction that serious evidence exists making it probable that the accused may have participated, as perpetrator or accomplice, in the commission of an § infraction. Compare indictment. The term mise en examen replaced the earlier § inculpation in 1993.
mise en mouvement
set in motion; initiation; launch
la mise en mouvement de l'action publique ⟶ initiation of criminal proceedings.
mise en scène
scheming
Usage note: in other contexts (notably theater): "staging", "stage design"
motif
grounds, reason, motive for a judgment or judicial decision
mutilation
mutilation. A type of corporal punishment under the Ancien régime. See § peine afflictive et infamante.


=== N ===

non-imputabilité
absence of guilt. absence of criminal responsibility due to mental defect or duress. See also: § causes de non-imputabilité, § élément moral, § aliénation mentale partielle.
non-lieu
dismissal of a case by the § juge d'instruction. a decision that there is no case to answer; the abandonment of a judiciary action by a juge d'instruction when evidence from the § enquête (investigation) does not justify further action. See also: § classement sans suite, § opportunité des poursuites,  § Irresponsabilité pénale) or when there is a justifying fact (e.g. § légitime défense).
Decision of an investigating court to put an end to criminal proceedings when it considers that an offense has not been established or that there is insufficient evidence against the perpetrator or accomplice of the offense; or when the accused is considered, for example, not to be criminally responsible at the time of the offense.


=== O ===

obligation de soins
court-ordered treatment. See § injonction thérapeutique.
officier ministériel
A person holding an office conferred by the State and appointed by the decision of a minister. Ministerial officers include: solicitors at the courts of appeal, the bailiffs (§ huissiers de justice), the notaries (notaires), and the lawyers at the Council of State and at the Court of Cassation. Some of them are also public officers (§ officier public).
officier public
Officers with the power to authenticate legal or judicial acts and to implement court decisions. Examples: notaries, bailiffs.
O.P.J.
officiers de police judiciaire. See § police judiciaire. See also: § agent de police judiciaire.
opportunité des poursuites
Prosecutorial discretion. The right of the § procureur Public Prosecutor's Office, when a criminal offense is reported to it, to initiate or not to initiate public proceedings according to the particularities of the case, according to article 40-1 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. Related terms: § classer sans suite, nolle prosequi. See also: § principe de legalité.
opposition
A civil or criminal remedy that allows people who have been judged by default to be tried again.
ordonnance
Multiple meanings, in different contexts:
Under the Ancien Régime, a regulation issued by the king.
In legislative context, a third category of law, defined by § Article 38 of the French Constitution of 1958, and sitting beside parliamentary § lois defined by § Article 34 and governmental § réglements (by § Article 37). This new type of law is called an ordonnance, and provides the government with temporary power to make law equal to a parliamentary § loi when specifically authorized by parliament to do so. See § loi d'habilitation. According to the § hierarchie des normes (hierarchy of norms), ordonnances sit at the same level as lois ordinaires and réglements.
In legislative context, according to the § hierarchie des normes, the least important of three types of law.  Compare: § arrêt, § décision de justice, § jugement, § relaxe. See also: § cour.
In a judiciary context, in criminal law, a decision taken by a single judge, for example the § juge d'instruction, such as an order of release (ordonnance de mise en liberté) or an order of dismissal (ordonnance de non-lieu). (In civil law, the ordonnance is only provisional.)
Not to be confused with § ordonnance pénale (criminal ordinance).
In other contexts: many other meanings, including: a  pharmaceutical prescription, and many others. See also: § loi organique, § loi ordinaire, § règlement.
ordonnance pénale
A simplified procedure for § contraventions (minor offenses) and certain § délits, particularly those related to automobile traffic. The § tribunal de police (police court) or the § tribunal correctionnel (criminal court) decides, by penal order whether or not to sentence the offender to a fine, or to certain penalties such as driving license suspension without the offender appearing in court. Not to be confused with § ordonnance.
ordre administratif
The administrative order of jurisdiction is one of the two orders of jurisdiction in French law (the other being the § ordre judiciaire–judicial order–and comprises administrative courts of first instance), administrative court of appeal, with the § Conseil d'État (Council of State) at the top. See also § dualisme juridictionnel.
ordre des avocats
bar association. Also known as barreau.
ordre judiciaire
The judicial order of jurisdiction is one of the two orders of jurisdiction (§ dualisme juridictionnel) in French law—the other being the § ordre administratif (administrative order)—and comprises courts of first instance (§ tribunal de police, § tribunal correctionnel, § cour d'assises), court of appeal, and § Cour de cassation at the top.  See also § dualisme juridictionnel.
ordre public

'public policy' is a rough equivalent in English, but the term is more central in French law and used more widely, comprising issues like public order, public morality, and public interest. A set of rules governing life in society and enacted in the general interest. A rule is characterized as being about "public order" when it is mandatory and imposed for imperative reasons of protection, safety or morality. Persons may not transgress these rules in any way and may not exercise any rights which would otherwise be available to them if they violate them.
the social condition characterized by tranquility, public health, and safety. Syn.: paix publique. See the Preamble to the 1848 Constitution, point IV (in French, in English). See also: § police administrative.
organ deliberant
decision-making body
organique
see § loi organique
ouï-dire
hearsay


=== P ===

parquet
The parquet is a collective term for § procureurs or the public prosecutor's office; the prosecution. It is a shorthand term used for § Ministère public.
partie civile
A civil plaintiff in a criminal proceeding. This is a person who considers himself to be the victim of an § infraction (offense) for which an § action publique (criminal proceeding) has been initiated in the criminal courts, and who wishes to obtain compensation for his loss.  This is a specific type of procedure in which a criminal proceeding and an § partie civile (civil proceeding) are combined, namely when a criminal prosecution also has a civil portion involving damages attached to it.
This term also designates the procedure (the complaint by a civil party) allowing the victim to go either to the investigating judge or the competent court to obtain compensation.

pays de droit coutumier
the "land of customary law" (pays de droit coutumier) in the northern part of France (roughly north of the Loire) during the Middle Ages where the law depended chiefly on a version of laws of Germanic origin. Contrast § pays de droit écrit.
pays de droit écrit
the "land of written law" (pays de droit écrit) in the southern part of France (roughly south of the Loire) during the Middle Ages where the law depended chiefly on a version of Roman law. Contrast § pays de droit coutumier.
peine
the penalty or sanction imposed on the § auteur (perpetrator) of an § infraction (offense). They can be § peines criminelles (criminal penalties), or § peines correctionnelles correctional penalties.
peine accessoire
an additional penalty automatically added to the § peine principale (main sentence); it cannot be imposed on its own, except when it is pronounced in place of the main sentence; it automatically follows from the main sentence. Since 2005, peine accessoires are prohibited by article 132-17 of the penal code. Contrast § peine complémentaire.
peine afflictive et infamante
penal sanctions under the Ancien régime for punishing middle-level crimes not involving prison terms, and including § amende honorable (public confession), § pilori (pillory), § fouet (whipping), § flétrissure (branding),  § galères (galleys), § mutilation, and § torture.
peine afflictive (lit. 'afflictive punishment') – a punishment that targets the criminal in his person; originally corporal punishment (1501) but anything affecting the body including § réclusion, exile, or death.
a penal sanction pronounced to plunge the convicted person into pain and sadness. While the penal code of 1810 still used this term, the 1993 Code ignores it.
peine infamante (lit. 'punishment of dishonor') - A punishment is considered to be § infamante (defamatory; degrading; dishonorable) when it is detrimental to the honor of the convicted person, and more precisely to the reputation he enjoys in society. Article 6 of the penal code of 1810 described banishment and degradation as simply dishonorable sentences. The current code does not use this term.
peine alternative
A judge may substitute an alternative to a prison sentence or fine, such as § bracelet électronique (electronic monitoring), § travaux d'intérêt général (community service),  or § suivi socio-judiciaire (socio-judicial follow-up) prison sentence. Contrast § peine complémentaire.
peine complémentaire
an additional penalty added to the main sentence and not merely implied by it (as is the case with § peine accessoire) it reinforces the main sentence and can be optional or mandatory. It may apply to § crimes or § délits, and one or more additional penalties may be added to the main sentence. Contrast § peine accessoire.
peine contraventionnelle
a penalty for a § contravention committed by a § personne physique (natural person). The main penalties are fines up to E3,750, divided into five classes and can under certain circumstances be combined with § peines complémentaires. Penalties for a § personne morale (legal person) are different, mainly a five-fold increase in the fine for a natural person.  
peine correctionnelle
a penalty for a § délit committed by a § personne physique (natural person). The main penalties are imprisonment for two months to ten years, and fines over E3,750. The chief § peines alternatives (alternative penalties) are § détention à domicile (house arrest) under § surveillance électronique (electronic surveillance). the § jour-amende (day-fine),  a workshop (stage) in citizenship, traffic school, drug usage, etc. and certain other penalties restrictive of rights or freedom.
peine criminelle
a penalty for a § crime committed by a § personne physique (natural person). The main penalties are custodial sentences (peines privatives de liberté) Other possibilities are fines (amende), additional penalties (§ peines complémentaires). Other penalties are defined for offenses committed by § personnes morales (legal persons).
peine de stage
A designation for any of several workshops established by the law § Perben II or thereafter as an alternative sentence for someone convicted of a § délit (middle-level offense) in areas such as: safe driving, drugs, domestic violence, sex trafficking, parental responsibility, sexism and equality of women and men, and combatting animal cruelty. See § stage de citoyenneté, and § stage de formation civique.
peine principale
the main penalty of the § infraction (offense); it can be pronounced alone and must be expressly stated in the decision. For § personnes physiques (natural persons), the main penalties are imprisonment on an eight-step scale from two months to ten years and a fine greater than €3,750. See § peine complémentaire, § peine accessoire.
perquisition
An investigative measure that consists of searching for evidence of an offense, at a person's home or in any location where it may be found. In the context of a § enquête de flagrance investigation, the consent of the occupant and the decision of the § juge des libertés are not necessary; beyond that, the concept of a search warrant as used in U.S. or Canadian law does not exist in French law.
personnalisation des peines
See § individualisation des peines.
personnalité juridique 
a legal person (human, or organization/business) having certain rights and obligations. Contrast English 'juridical person', which refers only to an organizational (non-human) entity; this latter English expression is represented in French by § personne morale or personnalité juridique morale. See § personne physique, § capacité juridique.
personne morale
A juridical person. An organization recognized as having a legal existence and that as such, holds rights and obligations (Example: a company, an association); Contrast: § personne physique (natural person).
personne physique
A natural person.  A human being who is recognized as a § personnalité juridique (legal person), i.e., someone having the capacity to exercise a number of legal rights and to take legal action.
personne publique
A § personne morale (legal person) having a juridical status of § droit public conferred upon it by law. such as a municipality or a government department for example
personnification des entreprises
corporate personhood. See also: § personnalité juridique, § personne morale, § capacité juridique.
pièce à conviction
exhibit; evidence
pilori
Pillory. A type of public punishment under the Ancien régime. See § peine afflictive et infamante.
placement sous surveillance électronique (PSE)
Electronic surveillance, such as an electronic bracelet, is a method of enforcing a prison sentence outside of a prison establishment. The bracelet, most often attached to the ankle, is an electronic transmitter that makes it possible to detect, at a distance, the presence or absence of the convicted person in a place and for a period previously determined in the context of the sentence.
placement sous surveillance électronique mobile (PSEM)
A security measure that can be imposed for a period of two years as part of the § libération conditionnelle (conditional release) of a person sentenced to a long prison term for certain offenses. The § bracelet électronique (electronic bracelet), is generally worn on the ankle, and is supplemented by a GPS device. The device is managed by the prison administration and makes it possible to verify the person's location and that they respect the obligations and prohibitions set by judicial authorities. It promotes reintegration into society (§ réinsertion) by providing support and monitoring compliance with the obligations set by the § juge de l'application des peines (probation judge).
plaignant
complainant
plainte
a criminal complaint (or more broadly, outside of criminal law, a complaint).
In the broader sense, the act of reporting by a victim of an activity, state of affairs, or punishable behavior to an administrative, civil, criminal, or disciplinary authority. Contrast: § dénonciation.
Usage notes:
§ porter plainte – to bring a complaint
déposer une plainte – to file a complaint
plainte en escroquerie – fraud complaint
retirer sa plainte – withdraw one's complaint
plainte contre X
a complaint against 'X'. See § plainte, and § X.
point d'honneur
any act or word that calls into question the honor of a person, to the point that he can not let the outrage go unpunished. In the past it was legitimate cause for a duel, but since dueling was prohibited, the sole arbiter for attacks on the moral integrity of a person is the courts.
Usage note (in other contexts):
faire un point d'honneur [de] – to make a point of something.
mettre un point d'honneur [à] – emphasize; be committed to, dedicated to, devoted to; put special care into; make a point of.
police administrative
police involved with prevention of crime (not part of criminal law). Contrast: § police judiciaire.
police judiciaire
Judicial police are police involved with criminal investigation. Officers of the judicial police (O.P.J.) may include: mayors and their assistants, officers of the gendarmerie, inspectors general, deputy directors of active police, controllers general, police commissioners and police officers; senior civil servants of the police nationale (national police force), and directors or deputy directors of the judicial police or the gendarmerie.
porter plainte
Literally: to bring a complaint (§ plainte). When notice of an § infraction (offense) is given to the police or to the § procureur (public prosecutor's office) by the victim of the offense, the term used is porter plainte. Compare: § dénoncer.
poursuite
prosecution, in the sense of poursuite judiciaire
Usage note: in other contexts, it means "pursuit", or "continuation" (non-legal sense).
pourvoi en cassation
to appeal to the § Cour de cassation or the § conseil d'Etat (Council of State).
cause de pourvoi ⟶ grounds for appeal
former un pourvoi  ⟶ appeal; lodge an appeal; appeal against
pouvoir exécutif
the government; the executive branch of the government (lit. 'executive power') See also: § séparation des pouvoirs.
pouvoir judiciaire
(lit. 'judiciary power'), one of three branches of government. The judicial authority defined in the § Constitution of 1958. One of the three § pouvoirs publics (governmental authorities). See also: § séparation des pouvoirs.
pouvoir législatif
(lit. 'legislative power'), one of three branches of government. The legislative authority defined in the Constitution of 1958. One of the three § pouvoirs publics (governmental authorities). See also: § séparation des pouvoirs.
pouvoirs publics
all governmental authorities namely, the § pouvoir législatif (legislative authority), or branch, which makes the laws; the § pouvoir exécutif (executive authority) which executes them; and the § pouvoir judiciaire (judicial authority), which interprets them and punishes infractions. See also § séparation des pouvoirs (separation of powers).
informally:  "the authorities".
There are several definitions which have evolved over time. The classic one, dating to Montesquieu, is the § séparation des pouvoirs (separation of powers) definition into three branches of governmental power or authority. In the 1958 Constitution, the pouvoirs publics are the institutions created or mentioned in the Constitution and established by law. Today, a broader conception of the term public authorities is used. It refers to all public authorities holding power, including local governments. This means that public authorities are involved in a wide range of economic and social fields, such as economic regulation and social protection. This extension of areas of intervention mainly benefits the executive branch (with, in particular, significant regulatory powers).
préjudice
injury; Damage to a person's property, body, feelings or honor. There are four types:
préjudice d'agrément (of enjoyment) – : the damage that results, generally following a bodily injury, from the deprivation of the enjoyment of certain acts of everyday life, such as the exercise of an artistic activity, a leisure activity, or a sport.
préjudice corporel (bodily injury) – injury to the health or physical or mental integrity of a person. Example: wound, infirmity.
préjudice matériel (material damage) – Damage to property. Example: dégâts, damage, physical deterioration, loss of income.
préjudice moral (emotional or psychological harm) – damage of a psychological nature. Example: suffering linked to the loss of a loved one.
In common speech, a synonym for dommage (damages; a term from civil law), but legally distinct.
prescription
limitation period; statute of limitations. Elapsed time after which no proceedings may be instituted against the § auteur (perpetrator) of an § infraction (offense): ten years for a § crime, three years for a § délit, and one year for a § contravention. Terms are longer for offenses against minors. Also known as prescription de l'action publique.
président
president.
chief justice; e.g., when speaking of the judge who presides over the § Cour d'assises.
présomption d'innocence
Presumption of innocence. Any person suspected of having committed an § infraction (offense), or under prosecution, shall be considered innocent of the acts of which he stands accused, as long as he has not been found guilty by the court with the appropriate jurisdiction (§ compétent) to judge him. See also article 9 of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, and article 1 of the penal code. According to the European Convention on Human Rights, anyone accused of an § infraction is presumed to be without blame as long as his § culpabilité (guilt) hasn't been legally and definitively established.
prêter serment
to swear an oath. Syn.: assermentation.
prévenu
The accused person suspected or accused of an § infraction of a less serious type (i.e., § délit, § contravention). See also: § accusé, § auteur, § défendeur, § inculpé, § intimé.
preuves
Evidence. See also: § éléments de preuve, § saisie.
principe à valeur constitutionnelle
any principle identified by the Conseil constitutionnel (Constitutional Council (France)) as having constitutional force, and consequently binding on the legislature as well as on other institutions of state. See also § bloc de constitutionnalité.
principe de légalité
The principle of legality is one of the most fundamental principles of French criminal law and holds that no one may be convicted of a criminal offense without a prior published legal text describing the offense and the penalty. Latin: Nullum crimen, nulla pœna sine lege, lit. 'no crime, no penalty, without a law'.
principe d'opportunité des poursuites
See § opportunité des poursuites.
procédure accusatoire et contradictoire
The adversarial system (or, "adversarial law"), is a system of justice whose rules of procedure are based on the parties to the litigation. Thus, the lawyers for the plaintiff and defendant are responsible for presenting their version of the facts and convincing the judge or jury of the merits of their case. This is the system used in common law countries, but is not used in France. Contrast § procédure inquisitoire.
procédure d'irrecevabilité
procedure opposing legislation outside the remit of Parliament
procédure inquisitoire
Inquisitorial system. A legal system in which the court is actively involved in investigating the facts of the case. Contrast § procédure accusatoire et contradictoire.
procédure pénale
criminal procedure. Focuses on how individuals accused of crimes are dealt with in the criminal justice system: how people are investigated, prosecuted, tried, and punished. In France, these procedural issues are codified in the French code of criminal procedure (§ code de procédure pénale). Contrast § droit pénal (criminal law).
procés
trial
procès-verbal (PV)
In legal context: a legal act drawn up by a public official, usually a § greffier, that transcribes findings, statements, reports, or a situation. Examples: notes about an investigation, or a seizure)
In other contexts: minutes; record; transcript.
procureur de la République
senior public prosecutor
procureur général
public prosecutor
promulgation
promulgation; publication that brings into force
proxénétisme
procuring (prostitution). See § racolage.


=== Q ===
qualification judiciaire
Qualification judiciaire (lit.: 'judicial qualification') is a process of reasoning that seeks to establish that the particular acts which the suspect is accused of fall within the scope of a legal charge and therefore constitute a criminal offense which is within the jurisdiction of the criminal courts. The procedure consists of bridging the gap between the facts, and the law, to determine whether the de facto situation can be matched with some legal notion, and that the facts alleged by the prosecutor correspond in every respect to acts incriminated by the legislature.
Usage note: no established translation in English; terms seen include: penal qualification, penal categorization, penal status, to be criminal in nature, criminal qualification, classified as criminal, to be a matter for criminal law.
qualifié
"aggravating", when used with some crimes. The term crime qualifié or délit qualifié (roughly, "aggravated felony") is used to refer to an offense when there is an aggravating circumstance. Parricide, for example, is a felony murder; similarly, a vol qualifié (lit., "aggravated theft") is  "armed robbery" or "aggravated robbery".
Usage notes:
In judgments by magistrates, the expression majorité qualifiée is used when a legislator requires a supermajority of 2/3.
In non-legal context, qualifié de means "characterized as" (or "by"), or "described as"; as a simple adj. or past participle, qualifié means "qualified", as in English.
quiconque
anyone who; everyone who; whoever. Used legally to emphasize that it applies to everyone, without exception. Judges use the term a lot for this reason, because it underlines the principle of § égalité devant la loi (equality before the law). 


=== R ===

racolage
solicitation of prostitution  abrogated by the law of 13 April 2016, which criminalized the clients of prostitution, and at the same time removed racolage from the criminal code. See § proxénétisme.
rappel à la loi
a warning; a reminder of the law as an alternative to prosecution. In the case of a minor infraction, the § ministère public (Public Prosecutor) can order a reminder of the law. The aim is to make the offender aware that they committed an illegal act, in order to prevent them from reoffending.
recel
concealment.
récidive
A previously convicted individual who commits, under certain conditions and within a certain period of time, a new offense that may result in a heavier sentence than usual. A repeat offender.
réclusion
imprisonment. See also § détention and § emprisonnement.
réclusion criminelle
imprisonment
réclusion criminelle à perpétuité
life imprisonment
reconnaissance préalable de culpabilité
See § comparution sur reconnaissance préalable de culpabilité.

recours
appeal. See also: § appel, § pourvoi.
régime
A term with a great many meanings in French; the nominal meaning is "the set of rules or factors that characterize the way something functions or runs", and derives from French regimen which goes back to 1285 with the meaning of "the action of governing or administrating". and in this sense is similar to the English regimen.
Usage:
Some examples are: régime matrimonial ("matrimonial regime"), régime parlementaire (parliamentary system), régime pénitentiaire ("prison system"; all the rules governing prison administration), régime de retraite ("pension plan"), régime de la sécurité sociale ("social security scheme"), and so on. When used to name a specific government or type of government, especially if there are negative connotations, English uses the cognate term: Régime de Vichy ("Vichy regime"), régime totalitaire ("totalitarian regime"), and similarly if the term is not translated: Ancien régime (English: "Ancien regime").
régime de semi-liberté
Work release program. See § semi-liberté.
réglementation
set of § règlements (regulations). Compare § loi, § ordonnance.
règlement
a regulation issued by the § pouvoir exécutif § pouvoir exécutif (government; executive branch). See also: § loi organique, § loi ordinaire.  There are two types:
§ décret  - issued by the Prime Minister or the President)
§ arrêté -  issued by the executive branch members other than the President or Prime Minister, such as ministers, regional prefects, or mayors
Règlements are of a lower rank than a § loi, and may be annulled. But those règlements which fall into the domain defined by Article 37 of the Constitution are considered § règlements autonomes and not an adjunct to a particular loi. A règlement is of the same nature as a loi (i.e., abstract, general, and impersonal), but is one level lower in the § hiérarchie des normes (hierarchy of norms). Compare § loi, § ordonnance.
In other contexts: many other meanings, including "payment".
réhabilitation
A measure which erases a criminal conviction. It ends all forfeitures or limitations on the exercise of individual rights resulting from the conviction. It is acquired either after the expiration of the time limits prescribed by law, or by a decision of the investigating chamber in response to a request made by the convicted person.
relaxe
Decision of a § tribunal correctionnel (criminal court) or a § tribunal de police (police court) to declare a defendant not guilty either because he is innocent, or because there was a reasonable doubt. Also: § acquittement. Compare: § arrêt, § décision de justice, § jugement, § ordonnance. See also: § cour.
remettre en cause
See § mettre en cause.
remise
handing over
renvoi
Postponement of a hearing to another date.
répressif 
The term French: droit répressif, lit. 'repressive law' is another term for criminal law. A {{Section link}}: required section parameter(s) missing is a court that deals with stopping ("repressing") criminal activity after it happens. Contrast with administrative law, tasked with preventing criminal activity, rather than cracking down on it. See also: § agent de répression, § service de répression.
réprimer
to incriminate
réquisitions
Written or oral conclusions taken in the interest of society that the public prosecutor presents before the criminal court to justify the guilt of a defendant and the sentence requested. 

Usage note: Also used in forms of the verb requérir, such as requis: Le procureur a requis une peine de 1 an de prison avec sursis. ⟶ The prosecutor has requested a suspended sentence of 1 year in prison.
réquisitoire
a formal submission (by the prosecution)
réquisitoire introductif
application for judicial investigation One of the ways that the § procureur can initiate criminal proceedings (§ action publique), in particular, via § citation directe.
Written arguments by which the § ministère public (public prosecutor) asks the judge to apply the criminal law to a defendant or an accused person under investigation (mise en examen). See also § requete.
résolution de mise en accusation
decision to bring charges
responsabilité pénale
Criminal responsibility
ressort
the scope or extent of a court's jurisdiction in terms of the geography and nature of the disputes assigned to it by law. For example, the correctional court cannot try an offense committed outside its ressort and for which the perpetrator does not live in that region.
A court decision is said to be "en dernier ressort" (final) if it can no longer be appealed.
rétention de sûreté
detention of dangerous offenders beyond the term of their sentence.
rétroactivité
the characteristic of a legal norm that regulates situations that arose before its adoption.
révision
An appeal against a conviction that allows a case to be retried in light of new facts or elements unknown at the time of the initial trial that could rule out the guilt of the convicted person.
rogatoire
See § commission rogatoire.
ruse
fraud


=== S ===

saisie
(noun) seizure, e.g., as part of a search (§ perquisition) for evidence (§ preuves), under the supervision of an officer of the judicial police (§ officier de police judiciaire).
saisine
Submission of a request to a jurisdiction, requiring a response in the form of a decision. Can be formulated as a § citation, § requête, or declaration to a § greffe. Example: reporting a § flagrant délit (crime in progress).
saisir
In non-legal context, saisir simply means:  "seize", "grab", "grasp".
In legal context, there are many meanings, such as "confiscate", which are directly related to the non-legal sense; these are straightforward, and not explained here. However, there is one sense of saisir in legal context that occurs frequently and has no universally accepted single translation in English; the rest of this entry concerns this sense, corresponding to CNRTL sense II., A (law), 2., and concerns a request made by an individual to an authority like a judge or a court to do something; or to refer a matter to a court.
The general form for this sense is: Person + saisit + Authority  + Of (de, d'un, d'une) +  Request, with these four parts:
subject: someone (a person, plaintiff, etc.) or institution who is the requester, i.e.,  the one who applies to or requests something (optional)
form of verb saisir (required)
object: someone or something in authority who may grant or act on a request: the judge, the court, the tribunal, etc. (required)
the request, usually as a prep. phrase with de, pour, etc. (optional)
Annotated examples:
La mère saisit le juge d'une demande de garde concernant les quatre enfants.
The mother[subj] applies to[saisit] the court[obj] for custody of all four children[request].
Le parquet a saisi le juge d'instruction du premier cabinet pour qu'il instruise l'affaire et délivre un mandat de dépôt contre les inculpés.
The prosecutor[subj] instructed[saisit] the examining magistrate of the first chamber[obj] to investigate the case[request-1] and issue arrest warrants for the accused[request-2].
How to translate saisir depends a lot on context, and may use terms like "apply to", "take to", "go to", "bring before", "approach", "request", "refer to", "submit", or other expressions, and the word order in English may be different:
saisir le juge aux affaires familiales ⟶ refer the matter to the judge for family affairs
le droit constitutionnel de saisir le juge ⟶ the constitutional right to go to court
il était loisible de saisir le juge ⟶ it was possible to bring the case before the judge
saisir le Tribunal d'une ordonnance de cesser et de s'abstenir ⟶ bring a cease and desist order before the Court
Toute personne qui objecte à cette ordonnance peut saisir le tribunal. ⟶ Anyone who objects to the order has recourse to the court.
Le médiateur peut également saisir le Tribunal constitutionnel ⟶ The Ombudsman can also submit cases to the Constitutional Court.
Les travailleurs victimes de discrimination peuvent saisir le tribunal de travail ⟶ Workers who are victims of discrimination may apply to the Labor Tribunal.
In the passive, the pattern uses the participial form saisi and inverted word order, often with optional parts missing:
le juge saisi de l'affaire ⟶ (lit.) "the judge applied to/requested [by someone] regarding the case", or in more usual English word order:  "the judge handling the case", "...on the case", or "...assigned to the case"
la décision du juge saisi de la requête ⟶ the judge for the motion
There is no exact translation for saisit (or in past participle form, saisi) in English, and how it appears in English translation is highly variable, and depends on the context (and the translator). Sometimes the best translation involves leaving the word out entirely. Also, the order of the elements is not always the same, and the request often comes before the authority-object.
ANF avait saisi le Juge d'Instruction de Marseille d'une plainte avec constitution de partie civile concernant des faits supposés par l'ancien fournisseur...  ⟶ ANF[subj] had filed[saisir] a complaint[request] with the Marseilles investigating magistrate[obj] bringing civil action against alleged acts committed by the supplier...
The request can be omitted, so just the subject, verb saisir, and object are present. In the abstract, the subject may be omitted:
Saisir le tribunal; saisir la justice.  ⟶  Going to[saisir] court[obj]; seeking[saisir] justice[obj]. Other translations include: bring legal proceedings, initiate a court case, file a case, go to court, refer [the case] to court.
Usage notes:
The form saisi des faits is often seen, and translation depends on context. The word faits means "facts", and depending on whether "saisi des faits" is a syntactic constituent in the sentence, the word "facts" may or may not appear in English translation. A literal translation of the passive construction might be: "[an authority] who had been applied to [by someone, unstated] with the facts [of an unstated (legal) request]"; but in free translation, this might come out simply as "[the judge] on the case", and may be expressed very differently in specific contexts.  Some examples:
La cause peut alors être entendue par un tribunal de compétence provinciale, qui est saisi des faits par un procureur de la Couronne.
⟶ The case would then proceed within the provincial jurisdiction to a crown attorney, who takes the facts to court.
En d'autres termes, [il] doit être saisi et considérer des faits nouveaux ou contestés pour confirmer une décision effective au client.
⟶ In other words, [he] must be involved and must consider new or contested facts in order to confirm an actual ruling to the client. Note: not a syntactic constituent; must use the word facts here.
il se peut qu'il en arriverait à une conclusion différente s'il était saisi des mêmes faits aujourd'hui.
⟶ if the same facts were before it today, with that Code available to it as an adjudicative tool, it might arrive at a different conclusion.  Not a constituent.
Le procureur européen, informé ou saisi de l'ensemble des faits, ne poursuivrait alors qu'au titre de l'infraction communautaire...
⟶ The European Public Prosecutor, receiving information or a referral, would prosecute only the Community offence...
sanction pénale
criminal sanctions; sentence; penalty.
sanction-réparation
A "reparation sanction": is an alternative sentence which obliges the perpetrator to repair the damage caused to the victim through financial compensation or reparation in kind.
scellés
1. an order that evidence be placed under seal. Also refers to the practice of a wax seal to an item.
Usage notes: in legal terminology, almost always plural. In the singular, it refers to the sealing material itself, such as wax.
placé sous scellé ⟶ placed under seal
2. The part of the § greffe (judicial registry) where evidence is stored.
3. Other meanings apply in civil law, having to do with sealing off buildings, rooms, etc. Breaking such a seal duly placed by civil authorities is punishable under criminal law.
sciemment
knowingly
semi-liberté
work release; day parole; lit: 'semi-freedom'. A criminal sanctions program that authorizes a convicted person to carry out activity outside the prison, which may be professional activity, training, internship, or medical treatment. At the end of each day, the convict returns to the detention center. See also: § centre de semi-liberté.
Usage note: often seen in the expression, § régime de semi-liberté.
séparation des pouvoirs
The separation of powers is the constitutional principle of the separation of § pouvoirs publics (governmental authorities; lit. 'public powers') into three branches: legislative (§ pouvoir législatif), executive (§ pouvoir exécutif), and judicial (§ pouvoir judiciaire), a principle dating to Montesquieu and John Locke, with forerunners in ancient Greek and Roman philosophy and government.
service de répression
law enforcement agency.  See § répression.
signification
An act by which a party brings to the attention of his adversary an act or a decision of justice by means of a § huissier de justice (judicial officer).
soustraction
appropriation
stage de citoyenneté
A citizenship workshop. An alternative sentence for someone convicted of a § délit (middle-level offense) which provides for completing a citizenship workshop, in lieu of prison time. Other laws introduced from 2004 to 2021 introduced training workshops in other domains; collectively these became known as a § peine de stage (workshop sentence). Introduced as part of the law 2004-204 of 9 March 2004, better known as the § loi Perben II.
stage de formation civique
A civic education training workshop is an educational measure aimed at reminding minors of the obligations resulting from the law, as well as making them aware of civil and criminal responsibilities and the duties involved in living in society. The minor is reminded of all these notions during short group training sessions relating to social organization or civic values for a duration not to exceed 30 hours.
stupéfiant
drug   See also § cession de stupéfiants
suivi judiciaire
See § suivi socio-judiciaire.
suivi socio-judiciaire
Socio-judicial supervision is a measure pronounced by the § tribunal correctionnel (criminal court) or the § cour d'assizes against the perpetrator of a § crime or § délit (major or serious offense) of a sexual nature. This measure allows for judicial and optionally also medical follow-up after the prison sentence has been served. It forces the convicted person to submit, under the supervision of the § juge de l'application des peines to measures of surveillance and assistance as well as to certain obligations, such as the prohibition on going to certain places, or to be around minors. Failure to comply is grounds for reimprisonment. May also be a stand-alone sentence. No universally recognized term in English; some terms seen are: socio-judicial surveillance, socio-judicial supervision, or probation. See also: § peine alternative.
supplice
torture
sur le fond
See § fond.
sur le forme
See § forme.
sursis
simple suspended sentence
Usage note:
sursis avec mise à l'épreuve: suspended sentence with certain conditions such as geographic restrictions or interaction restrictions
surveillance
supervision
surveillance électronique
A § peine alternative (alternative penalty) such as a § bracelet électronique;  See § placement sous surveillance électronique.


=== T ===

talion, loi du
law of retaliation Originally, and dating to the Code of Hammurabi, it restricts a victim from taking vengeance in a disproportionate manner; "an eye for an eye".
témoin
witness
témoin assisté
represented witness
an intermediate witness status, between that of a simple § témoin (witness) and someone § mis en examen (criminally charged); introduced in 1987, later included in the § loi sur la présomption d'innocence. This is a person who is listed as a witness, but at the same time is named either in the § réquisitoire introductif or in the initial complaint by the victim. Because of their status as a possible suspect, the law requires them to be heard only in presence of their lawyer.
A person who is the subject of a complaint, accused or prosecuted by the § Parquet (Public Prosecutor's Office), against whom there are some clues (insufficient for an indictment) that make it likely that he or she has committed a crime or an offense. His lawyer has access to the case file. When heard by the investigating judge, the assisted witness may ask to be confronted with the person or persons implicating him. If the judge considers that the witness should be placed under judicial supervision or in pre-trial detention, or be referred to the criminal court or the assize court to be tried, he or she will then proceed with the examination.
témoin instrumentaire
a legal witness; a witness required for the official recording of certain transactions.
tentative
attempt
A § crime or § délit interrupted in act by an event beyond the control of its perpetrator. The attempt is punishable by the same penalties as if the offense had been fully carried out.
Usage notes:
tentative achevée ⟶ failed attempt
tentative stérile ⟶ failed attempt
torture
torture. A type of punishment used in the Ancien régime. See also: § supplice, § peine afflictive et infamante.
travail d'intérêt général (TIG)
community service; carrying out unpaid work, within a specified time, for the benefit of a public body or an approved association, as part of a sentence by an adult or juvenile court. One of several alternative penalties that are sometimes ordered instead of incarceration.
travaux forcés
Penal labor; forced labor as a judicial punishment.
tribunal
court; a court composed of one or more judges, charged with settling disputes and rendering a § décision de justice (legal judgment).
tribunal correctionnel
a court of first instance, responsible for judging § délits (major offenses). If necessary, it rules on the request for compensation made by the victim (called the § partie civile (civil party))
tribunal de grande instance (TGI)
a court having general jurisdiction in civil matters.
tribunal de police
a court that tries minor offenses; a court of first instance, ruling with a single judge. It judges 5th class offenses. The police court is the criminal court of the § tribunal d'instance (district court).
tribunal des conflits
A high jurisdiction made up equally of magistrates from the § ordre administratifand § ordre judiciaire (administrative and judicial orders), whose mission is to resolve conflicts of jurisdiction between the courts of the judicial order and those of the administrative order. For example: these two orders claim to be simultaneously competent or incompetent for the same case.
tribunal répressif 
criminal court. See § repressif.
trouble neuropsychique
neuro-psychological illness
trouble psychique
psychological illness
tuer
to kill See § homicide.


=== UV ===

valeur constitutionnelle
See § principe à valeur constitutionnelle.
verdict
A solemn declaration by which the magistrates and § juré (jurors) of the § cour d'assises answer the question of the guilt of a defendant, and set the sentence, if any. The verdict can be an § acquittement (acquittal), or a § condamnation (guilty verdict).
victime
victim. A person who personally and directly suffers a physical, moral or material § préjudice (injury).
viol
rape; In the classic sense, rape consists in the fact of a man having a carnal relationship with a non-consenting woman, or in circumstances where she cannot manifest her § volonté (will).
violation
breach; violation. In the former sense, compare § effraction. In the latter sense, can be a synonym for § infraction (offense).
violer
to breach; to rape.
visite domiciliaire
house search
voie de fait
offense of violence
Note: has an entirely different meaning in administrative law.
vol
theft
volontairement
intentionally
volonté
will;  In criminal law, volonté (will) is a firm and definite determination in a person's mind to do something that will have an effect in the outside world. The term § intention indicates the purpose for which the will is directed.


=== WXYZ ===

X
X represents an unknown person, a 'John Doe', used in a criminal complaint when the name of the person is not known. Compare § condamnation par défaut.
Usage note: plainte contre X ⟶  a complaint against 'X'. Analogous to a "John Doe defendant", or a John Doe lawsuit.


== See also ==
Administrative police (France)
Glossary of Brazil investigative terms
Glossary of the French Revolution
Glossary of law
Judiciary of France#Glossary
Legal history of France
Translating "law" to other European languages


== References ==
Notes

Citations


== Works cited ==


== Further reading ==
Body-Gendrot, Sophie; Hough, Mike; Kerezsi, Klara, eds. (15 August 2013). The Routledge Handbook of European Criminology. London: Routledge. ISBN 978-1-136-18549-6. OCLC 895776051.
Cao, Deborah (12 April 2007). Translating Law. Bristol: Multilingual Matters. ISBN 978-1-84769-537-6. OCLC 1064570757.
Colette-Basecqz, Nathalie (2014). "L'élément moral des infractions" (PDF).  Written at Lambinet, France. L'élément moral en droit. Conférence du jeune Barreau de Namur. Limal, Belgium: Anthemis. Retrieved 26 July 2025.
French Ministry of Justice (2023). "Lexique | Justice.fr" [Glossary | Justice.fr]. Ministère de la Justice (in French).
Glanert, Simone; Legrand, Pierre (21 February 2013). "Foreign Law in Translation: If Truth Be Told". In Freeman, Michael; Smith, Fiona (eds.). Law and Language: Current Legal Issues Volume 15. OUP Oxford. pp. 513–532. ISBN 978-0-19-967366-7. OCLC 1120355164.
Jallamion, Carine (9 July 2020). "La « traduction » du droit français aux colonies : du vocabulaire juridique à l'entreprise de colonisation" [The 'translation”' of French law in the colonies: from legal vocabulary to the enterprise of colonization]. In Bassano, Marie; Mastor, Wanda (eds.). Justement traduire : Les enjeux de la traduction juridique (histoire du droit, droit comparé) [The challenges of legal translation (legal history, comparative law)]. Actes de colloques de l'IFR (in French). Toulouse: Presses de l’Université Toulouse Capitole. pp. 199–222. doi:10.4000/books.putc.7632. ISBN 978-2-37928-080-1..
A boundary commission is a legal entity that determines borders of nations, states, constituencies.
Notable boundary commissions have included:

Afghan Boundary Commission, an Anglo-Russian Boundary Commission, of 1885 and 1893, delineated the northern frontier of Afghanistan.
Anglo-Turkish Boundary Commission of 1902–1905, delineated the border between Yemen and the Aden Protectorate.
Boundary commissions (United Kingdom) of the United Kingdom
Boundary Commission (Ireland) between the United Kingdom and Ireland
Boundary Commission of India, electoral boundary commission of India
Boundary Commission (Pacific Northwest) of the Pacific Northwest
Boundary Commission (Maine) of Maine
Boundary Commission (Alaska Panhandle) of the Alaska Panhandle
Boundary Commissions (Netherlands) of Indonesia
Comisión de Límites, the Mexican Boundary Commission after the Adams–Onís Treaty
International Boundary and Water Commission, for the US–Mexico border
Canada–United States International Boundary Commission, for the Canada–US border
Local Government Boundary Commission for England


== References ==.
The European Judicial Network (EJN) is a network of contact points within the EU designed to facilitate judicial cooperation across borders. With a focus on serious crime (such as organized crime, corruption, drug smuggling and terrorism), it helps form and maintain contacts between agencies in member states.
The Network was created by Joint Action 98/428 in 1998, to fulfil recommendation no. 21 of the Action Plan to Combat Organised Crime adopted by the Council of the European Union on 28 April 1997.
A priority of the EJN is the dissemination of information to its citizens, judges and legal practitioners, primarily through its Web site. The EJN's main functions are: Facilitating judicial cooperation among the Member States; travelling to meet the contact points of other State Members, as necessary; providing the local judicial authorities of their country with the necessary legal and practical information; providing the local judicial authorities of other member states the necessary legal and practical information; improving the coordination of the judicial cases.
A member state's Contact Point can identify relevant other Contact Points via the European Justice Atlas.
The secretariat of the EJN functions as an independent autonomous unit within the staff of Eurojust, based in The Hague in the Netherlands.


== References ==


== External links ==
European Judicial Network.
Analytical jurisprudence is a philosophical approach to law that draws on the resources of modern analytical philosophy to try to understand the nature of law. It is a branch of jurisprudence, which is also called the philosophy of law. Since the boundaries of analytical philosophy are somewhat vague, it is difficult to say how far it extends.  H. L. A. Hart is the most influential writer in the history of modern analytical jurisprudence, though the analytical approach to jurisprudence goes back at least to Jeremy Bentham.
Analytical jurisprudence is not to be mistaken for legal formalism (the idea that legal reasoning is or can be modelled as a mechanical, algorithmic process). Indeed, it was the analytical jurists who first pointed out that legal formalism is fundamentally mistaken as a theory of law.
Analytic, or "clarificatory" jurisprudence uses a neutral point of view and descriptive language when referring to aspects of legal systems. It rejects natural law's fusing of what law is and what it ought to be. David Hume famously argued in A Treatise of Human Nature that people invariably slip between describing that the world is a certain way to saying that therefore we ought to engage in a particular course of action. But as a matter of pure logic, one cannot conclude that we ought to do something merely because something is the case. So, analysing and clarifying the way the world is must be treated as a strictly separate from normative and evaluative ought questions.
The most important questions of analytic jurisprudence are: "What are laws?"; "What is the law?"; "What is the relationship between law and power?"; and "What is the relationship between law and morality?"


== See also ==
Rule of law
Legality
Rule according to higher law


== References ==.
Legal history or the history of law is the study of how law has evolved and why it has changed. Legal history is closely connected to the development of civilizations and operates in the wider context of social history. Certain jurists and historians of legal process have seen legal history as the recording of the evolution of laws and the technical explanation of how these laws have evolved with the view of better understanding the origins of various legal concepts; some consider legal history a branch of intellectual history. Twentieth-century historians viewed legal history in a more contextualised manner – more in line with the thinking of social historians. They have looked at legal institutions as complex systems of rules, players and symbols and have seen these elements interact with society to change, adapt, resist or promote certain aspects of civil society. Such legal historians have tended to analyze case histories from the parameters of social-science inquiry, using statistical methods, analysing class distinctions among litigants, petitioners and other players in various legal processes. By analyzing case outcomes, transaction costs, and the number of settled cases, they have begun examining legal institutions, practices, procedures, and briefs offering a more nuanced picture of law and society than traditional legal studies of jurisprudence, case law and civil codes can achieve.


== Ancient world ==

Ancient Egyptian law, dating as far back as 3000 BC, was based on the concept of Ma'at, and was characterised by tradition, rhetorical speech, social equality and impartiality. By the 22nd century BC, Ur-Nammu, an ancient Sumerian ruler, formulated the first extant law code, consisting of casuistic statements ("if... then..."). Around 1760 BC, King Hammurabi further developed Babylonian law, by codifying and inscribing it in stone. Hammurabi placed several copies of his law code throughout the kingdom of Babylon as stelae, for the entire public to see; this became known as the Codex Hammurabi. The most intact copy of these stelae was discovered in the 19th century by British Assyriologists, and has since been fully transliterated and translated into various languages, including English, German and French. Ancient Greek has no single word for "law" as an abstract concept, retaining instead the distinction between divine law (thémis), human decree (nómos) and custom (díkē). Yet Ancient Greek law contained major constitutional innovations in the development of democracy.


== Southern Asia ==

Ancient India and China represent distinct traditions of law, and had historically independent schools of legal theory and practice. The Arthashastra, dating from the 400 BC, and the Manusmriti from 100 BCE were influential treatises in India, texts that were considered authoritative legal guidance. Manu's central philosophy was tolerance and pluralism, and was cited across South East Asia. During the Muslim conquests in the Indian subcontinent, sharia was established by the Muslim sultanates and empires, most notably Mughal Empire's Fatawa-e-Alamgiri, compiled by emperor Aurangzeb and various scholars of Islam. After British colonialism, Hindu tradition, along with Islamic law, was  supplanted by the common law when India became part of the British Empire. Malaysia, Brunei, Singapore and Hong Kong also adopted the common law.


== Eastern Asia ==

The eastern Asia legal tradition reflects a unique blend of secular and religious influences. Japan was the first country to begin modernising its legal system along western lines, by importing bits of the French, but mostly the German Civil Code. This partly reflected Germany's status as a rising power in the late nineteenth century. Similarly, traditional Chinese law gave way to westernisation towards the final years of the Qing dynasty in the form of six private law codes based mainly on the Japanese model of German law. Today Taiwanese law retains the closest affinity to the codifications from that period, because of the split between Chiang Kai-shek's nationalists, who fled there, and Mao Zedong's communists who won control of the mainland in 1949. The current legal infrastructure in the People's Republic of China was heavily influenced by soviet Socialist law, which essentially inflates administrative law at the expense of private law  rights. Today, however, because of rapid industrialisation China has been reforming, at least in terms of economic (if not social and political) rights. A new contract code in 1999 represented a turn away from administrative domination. Furthermore, after negotiations lasting fifteen years, in 2001 China joined the World Trade Organization.

Yassa of the Mongol Empire


== Canon law ==

The legal history of the Catholic Church is the history of Catholic canon law, the oldest continuously functioning legal system in the West. Canon law originates much later than Roman law but predates the evolution of modern European civil law traditions. The cultural exchange between the secular (Roman/Barbarian) and ecclesiastical (canon) law produced the jus commune and greatly influenced both civil and common law.
The history of Latin canon law can be divided into four periods: the jus antiquum, the jus novum, the jus novissimum and the Code of Canon Law. In relation to the Code, history can be divided into the jus vetus (all law before the Code) and the jus novum (the law of the Code, or jus codicis). Eastern canon law developed separately.
In the twentieth century, canon law was comprehensively codified. On 27 May 1917, Pope Benedict XV codified the 1917 Code of Canon Law.
John XXIII, together with his intention to call the Second Vatican Council, announced his intention to reform canon law, which culminated in the 1983 Code of Canon Law, promulgated by John Paul II on 25 January 1983. John Paul II also brought to a close the long process of codifying the Eastern Catholic canon law common to all 23 sui juris Eastern Catholic Churches on 18 October 1990 by promulgating the Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches.


== Islamic law ==

One of the major legal systems developed during the Middle Ages was Islamic law and jurisprudence. A number of important legal institutions were developed by Islamic jurists during the classical period of Islamic law and jurisprudence. One such institution was the Hawala, an early informal value transfer system, which is mentioned in texts of Islamic jurisprudence as early as the 8th century. Hawala itself later influenced the development of the Aval in French civil law and the Avallo in Italian law.


== European laws ==


=== Roman Empire ===

Roman law was heavily influenced by Greek teachings. It forms the bridge to the modern legal world, over the centuries between the rise and decline of the Roman Empire. Roman law, in the days of the Roman Republic and Empire, was heavily procedural and there was no professional legal class. Instead a lay person, iudex, was chosen to adjudicate. Precedents were not reported, so any case law that developed was disguised and almost unrecognised. Each case was to be decided afresh from the laws of the state, which mirrors the (theoretical) unimportance of judges' decisions for future cases in civil law systems today. During the 6th century AD in the Eastern Roman Empire, the Emperor Justinian codified and consolidated the laws that had existed in Rome so that what remained was one twentieth of the mass of legal texts from before. This became known as the Corpus Juris Civilis. As one legal historian wrote, "Justinian consciously looked back to the golden age of Roman law and aimed to restore it to the peak it had reached three centuries before."


=== Middle Ages ===

During the Byzantine Empire the Justinian Code was expanded and remained in force until the Empire fell, though it was never officially introduced to the West. Instead, following the fall of the Western Empire and in former Roman countries, the ruling classes relied on the Theodosian Code to govern natives and Germanic customary law for the Germanic incomers – a system known as folk-right – until the two laws blended together. Since the Roman court system had broken down, legal disputes were adjudicated according to Germanic custom by assemblies of learned lawspeakers in rigid ceremonies and in oral proceedings that relied heavily on testimony.
After much of the West was consolidated under Charlemagne, law became centralized so as to strengthen the royal court system, and consequently case law, and abolished folk-right. However, once Charlemagne's kingdom definitively splintered, Europe became feudalistic, and law was generally not governed above the county, municipal or lordship level, thereby creating a highly decentralized legal culture that favored the development of customary law founded on localized case law. However, in the 11th century, crusaders, having pillaged the Byzantine Empire, returned with Byzantine legal texts including the Justinian Code, and scholars at the University of Bologna were the first to use them to interpret their own customary laws. Medieval European legal scholars began researching the Roman law and using its concepts and prepared the way for the partial resurrection of Roman law as the modern civil law in a large part of the world. There was, however, a great deal of resistance so that civil law rivaled customary law for much of the late Middle Ages.
After the Norman conquest of England, which introduced Norman legal concepts into medieval England, the English King's powerful judges developed a body of precedent that became the common law. In particular, Henry II instituted legal reforms and developed a system of royal courts administered by a small number of judges who lived in Westminster and traveled throughout the kingdom. Henry II also instituted the Assize of Clarendon in 1166, which allowed for jury trials and reduced the number of trials by combat. Louis IX of France also undertook major legal reforms and, inspired by ecclesiastical court procedure, extended Canon-law evidence and inquisitorial-trial systems to the royal courts. In 1280 and 1295 measures were instituted by the Court of Arches and other authorities in London to improve the conduct of lawyers in the courts. Also, judges no longer moved on circuits becoming fixed to their jurisdictions, and jurors were nominated by parties to the legal dispute rather than by the sheriff. In addition, by the 10th century, the Law Merchant, first founded on Scandinavian trade customs, then solidified by the Hanseatic League, took shape so that merchants could trade using familiar standards, rather than the many splintered types of local law. A precursor to modern commercial law, the Law Merchant emphasised the freedom of contract and alienability of property.


=== Modern European law ===

The two main traditions of modern European law are the codified legal systems of most of continental Europe, and the English tradition based on case law.
As nationalism grew in the 18th and 19th centuries, lex mercatoria was incorporated into countries' local law under new civil codes. Of these, the French Napoleonic Code and the German Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch became the most influential. As opposed to English common law, which consists of massive tomes of case law, codes in small books are easy to export and for judges to apply. However, today there are signs that civil and common law are converging. European Union law is codified in treaties, but develops through the precedent set down by the European Court of Justice.


== African law ==

The African law system is based on common law and civilian law. Many legal systems in Africa were based on ethnic customs and traditions before colonization took over their original system. The people listened to their elders and relied on them as mediators during disputes. Several states didn't keep written records, as their laws were often passed orally. In the Mali Empire, the Kouroukan Fouga, was proclaimed in 1222–1236 AD as the official constitution of the state. It defined regulations in both constitutional and civil matters. The provisions of the constitution are still transmitted to this day by griots under oath. During colonization, authorities in Africa developed an official legal system called the Native Courts. After colonialism, the major faiths that stayed were Buddhism, Hinduism, and Judaism.


== United States ==
The United States legal system developed primarily out of the English common law system (with the exception of the state of Louisiana, which continued to follow the French civilian system after being admitted to statehood).  Some concepts from Spanish law, such as the prior appropriation doctrine and community property, still persist in some US states, particularly those that were part of the Mexican Cession in 1848.
Under the doctrine of federalism, each state has its own separate court system, and the ability to legislate within areas not reserved to the federal government.


== Global Legal Traditions ==
A comprehensive view of legal history must encompass legal systems beyond the Western tradition. Scholars have increasingly focused on non-Western frameworks, such as Islamic law, which emphasizes religious principles; Confucian legal traditions, where moral conduct is integral to law; and the adaptive nature of African customary law. By comparing these diverse systems with Western legal developments, researchers have highlighted both striking differences and unexpected similarities, thereby enriching our understanding of law as a global phenomenon.


== See also ==
Legal biography
Association of Young Legal Historians (AYLH)
Constitution of the Roman Republic


== Notes ==


== References ==
Farah, Paolo (August 2006). "Five Years of China WTO Membership. EU and US Perspectives about China's Compliance with Transparency Commitments and the Transitional Review Mechanism". Legal Issues of Economic Integration. 33 (3): 263–304. doi:10.54648/LEIE2006016. S2CID 153128973. SSRN 916768.
Barretto, Vicente (2006). Dicionário de Filosofia do Direito. Unisinos Editora. ISBN 85-7431-266-5.
Della Rocca, Fernando (1959). Manual of Canon Law. The Bruce Publishing Company.
Glenn, H. Patrick (2000). Legal Traditions of the World. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-876575-4.
Sadakat Kadri, The Trial: A History from Socrates to O.J. Simpson, HarperCollins 2005. ISBN 0-00-711121-5
Kelly, J.M. (1992). A Short History of Western Legal Theory. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-876244-5.
Gordley, James R.; von Mehren; Arthur Taylor (2006). An Introduction to the Comparative Study of Private Law. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-68185-8.
Otto, Martin (2011). "Law". European History Online. Retrieved November 11, 2011.
Sealy, L.S.; Hooley, R.J.A. (2003). Commercial Law. LexisNexis Butterworths.
Stein, Peter (1999). Roman Law in European History. Cambridge University Press. pp. 32. ISBN 0-521-64372-4.
Kempin, Jr., Frederick G. (1963). Legal History: Law and Social Change. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall.


== Further reading ==
The Oxford History of the Laws of England. 13 Vols. Oxford University Press, 2003–. (Six volumes to date: Vol. I (Canon Law and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction from 597 to the 1640s), vol. II (871–1216), vol. VI (1483–1558), vols. XI–XIII (1820–1914))
The Oxford International Encyclopedia of Legal History. Ed. Stanley N. Katz. 6 Vols. Oxford University Press, 2009. (OUP catalogue. Oxford Reference Online)
Potz, Richard: Islam and Islamic Law in European Legal History, European History Online, Mainz: Institute of European History, 2011, retrieved: November 28, 2011.


== External links ==

The Legal History Project (Resources and interviews)
Some legal history materials
The Schoyen Collection
The Roman Law Library by Yves Lassard and Alexandr Koptev.
CHD Centre for Legal History – Faculty of Law, University of Rennes 1
Centre for Legal History – Edinburgh Law School
The European Society for History of Law
Collection of Historical Statutory Material – Cornell Law Library
Historical Laws of Hong Kong Online – University of Hong Kong Libraries, Digital Initiatives
Basic Law Drafting History Online -University of Hong Kong Libraries, Digital Initiatives.
A certified translation renders the meaning of text into another language in accordance with  the requirements of the target jurisdiction, enabling it to be used in formal procedures, with the translator accepting responsibility for its accuracy. These requirements vary widely from country to country. While some countries allow only state-appointed translators to produce such translations, others will accept those carried out by any competent bilingual individual. Between these two extremes are countries where a certified translation can be carried out by any professional translator with the correct credentials (which may include membership of specific translation associations or the holding of certain qualifications).
English speaking countries, such as the United Kingdom, the USA, Australia and New Zealand, fall on the more relaxed end of the spectrum, and simply require certified translations to include a statement made by the translator attesting to its accuracy, along with the date, the translator's credentials and contact details. This is the type of certification that is required by UK government bodies, such as the Home Office and the UK Border Agency, as well as by universities and most foreign embassies.
European countries other than the UK tend to have much stricter laws regarding who can produce a certified translation, with most appointing official certified translators based on them having obtained the local state-regulated qualification.


== Legal requirements ==
For legal and official purposes, evidentiary documents and other official documentation are usually required in the official language(s) of a jurisdiction.
In some countries, it is a requirement for translations of such documents that a translator swear an oath to attest that it is the legal equivalent of the source text. Often, only translators of a special class are authorized to swear such oaths. In some cases, the translation is accepted as a legal equivalent only if it is accompanied by the original or a sworn or certified copy of it.
Even if a translator specializes in legal translation or is a lawyer in their country, this does not necessarily make them a sworn translator. The procedure for translating to legal equivalence differs from country to country.


=== Argentina ===
In compliance with local laws, all documents written in languages other than Spanish have to be translated into Spanish by a certified licensed translator, pursuant to local laws. Generally speaking, all documents to be submitted before official authorities (including personal papers and some commercial contracts) have to be translated and signed by a certified translator ("traductor público"), whose stamp and signature have to be legalized by the relevant professional association that issued the translator's license. All private persons, companies, the judiciary, and other government departments are subject to various laws regarding documents or depositions in a foreign language, such as the relevant regulations of the Argentine Civil and Commercial Code, the Argentine Codes of Civil and Criminal Procedure, among others. In order to be certified as a "traductor público", candidates have to attend university courses leading to the professional degree of "traductor público" / "traductora pública".


=== Austria ===
Pursuant to section 14 of the Sworn and Certified Experts, Interpreters and Translators Act #137/1995 (SDG) as amended, regional courts are entitled to appoint sworn translators for translations between German and any language (including sign language), who have sworn an oath at court after having passed an official exam. To be admitted to the exam, candidates must present evidence of at least 5 years of professional experience as a translator or interpreter or of at least 2 years of professional experience if they have graduated in translation studies at a university. Although mostly referred to as "Gerichtsdolmetscher", the correct name of their status is "allgemein beeidete/r und gerichtlich zertifizierte/r Dolmetscher/in". Sworn translators are entitled to create public instruments by signing and sealing of translations attached to originals. No further notarization of their signature on translations is needed, and sworn translators can apply at court for the adding of an apostille. Police are advised to involve sworn interpreters to overcome language barriers whenever this is possible. Most public authorities in Austria accept translations of documents as legally equivalent only when sealed and signed by a sworn interpreter for the given language.
The authorization will lapse if a sworn interpreter will not attend regular professional training.


=== Belgium ===
"Sworn Translators" (singular Dutch: beëdigd vertaler, French: traducteur assermenté) or "Sworn Interpreter" (singular Dutch: beëdigd tolk, French: interprète assermenté) swear an oath before the president of the tribunal of the first instance of the judicial district in which they have their place of residence. In the past translators and interpreters in all judicial districts aspiring to "sworn" status were screened for suitability by the Crown Prosecutor. The candidate has to state the language combinations for he or she wishes to be sworn. A diploma of translator/interpreter is usually regarded as adequate proof of competence. There is no limitation on the language combinations which can be recognized.
However, following a scandal involving an illegal immigrant who obtained sworn translator status, The president of the tribunal of the first instance at Antwerp, launched an experimental scheme whereby aspiring sworn translators and interpreters have to undergo training organized by the Ministry of Justice and submit to examination. The same president, based on his interpretation of the language laws, also ruled that the only language combinations that could be recognized for a sworn translator/interpreter status were those in which Dutch was either the original language or the target language. This view has not yet been adopted by other judicial districts in Belgium.


=== Brazil ===
Official documents can only be translated by Public Sworn Translators and Interpreters, who are certified and accredited by the registry of commerce of each state. The applicants must pass highly demanding oral and written examinations for specific language pairs. They undergo background checks before receiving a registration number, which must be informed in the heading of every translation. 
Ad hoc (temporary) translators can also be appointed by the Registry of Commerce to do a single translation job when there is no Public Translator registered for that specific language pair.
The registry of commerce of each state also sets the translation fees.
Although the public sworn translator/interpreter must reside in the state of registration, his translations are valid in the entire country. Institutions and government agencies in cities and states different from those of residence of the public sworn translator may require the notarial verification of the translator's signature.
Foreign documents must be verified by a Brazilian consulate or embassy in the country they were issued before translation. Official documents translated into a foreign language need to have the public sworn translator's signature verified by the Brazilian Ministry of Foreign Affairs if the institution or government agency of the foreign country so requires.


=== Canada ===
Official translation of documents can be produced in one of two ways. Certified translations are those completed by a certified translator and accompanied by the translator's declaration, signature, and seal. The title of "certified translator" is a protected title in Canada, and only those individuals who are members in good standing of a provincial translators' association and have passed a certification exam can use this title and produce certified translations. An alternative method for producing official translations in Canada is by attaching a sworn affidavit signed by the translator in the presence of a notary public or commissioner for taking affidavits to the translation.


=== Germany ===
German regional courts (Landgerichte) have the power to appoint "sworn translators". The specific title and the appointment procedure are different in each state. In most cases, the candidates are required to pass an examination. Germany maintains an official database online at www.justiz-uebersetzer.de that lists all translators sworn-in in all federal states.


=== Hungary ===
There are five qualification types for translators and interpreters in Hungary: technical translator, technical translator-proofreader, interpreter, technical interpreter, and conference interpreter. These qualifications can be acquired in BA and MA programs, postgraduate courses, and in institutions accredited by the Ministry of Public Administration and Justice.
Anyone regardless of age and qualification may apply for a qualifying examination in interpretation. Qualifications for technical translation, technical translation proofreading, technical interpretation, and conference interpretation can be obtained in the following fields: social science, natural science, technology, and economics. Anyone with a degree in one of the above fields may apply for a qualifying examination in technical translation and technical interpretation in the given field. Qualified technical interpreters and technical translators may be further qualified for conference interpretation and technical translation proofreading, respectively.
The National Office for Translation and Attestation (Országos Fordító és Fordításhitelesítő Iroda, OFFI) is a company in Hungary that has the exclusive right to certify translations both from and to Hungarian created by the office itself or a third party, and to make certified copies of documents written in a foreign language. Interpretation in courts of Budapest is provided by OFFI.
If the Office cannot provide an interpreter, and for courts outside Budapest, an interpreter registered by the local authorities will be appointed. If no official interpreter is available, a suitable person with a good command of the required language will be appointed.


=== India ===
There are less documentation and sources known. A sworn-in Interpreter or Translator as per Maharashtra Courts Civil Law Chapter 26 of OATHS AND AFFIDAVITS prescribed under section 6 of the Oaths Act, 1969 (point 515) may with help of Form No.3 make an affidavit that he shall well and truly interpret pieces of evidence given by witnesses and translate correctly and accurately all documents given to him or her for translation.


=== Indonesia ===
In Indonesia, sworn translators are persons having attended and passed legal translation examinations organized by the School of Linguistics and Cultural Sciences, University of Indonesia (FIB, UI). After passing the exam, they will be sworn in by the governor of DKI Jakarta, provided that they have a Jakarta ID card. For other regions, each has to write to their respective governor to take an oath by their governor, thus obtain the status 'sworn'.
Alternatively, the Association of Indonesian Translators or HPI also has exams for members who want to have a certification as a competent, professional translator or interpreter. Upon passing, the certification will expire in 5 years.


=== Italy ===
Both Italian courts and consulates have the power to appoint as "official translators" (traduttori giurati or ufficiali) candidates who pass an examination or show proof of language proficiency (usually a university degree).


=== Mexico ===
In Mexico, certified translation is known as a translation that is sealed and signed by a government-authorized expert translator (Perito traductor autorizado), these expert translators are commonly authorized by each state's Court of Justice, or by the Federal Judicial Council, but local government offices can also give out such authorizations in certain cases (E.g. Civil Registry offices in Guanajuato and Jalisco). The authorization procedure are different in each state, and in most cases the candidates are required to pass an examination. There is no additional requirement in order to attest for the authenticity of the translation.


=== Netherlands ===
The Bureau for Sworn Interpreters and Translators, a department of the Dutch Legal Aid Council that has been entrusted by the Ministry of Justice with various implementation tasks in respect of the Sworn Interpreters and Translators Act. They have two levels of accreditation however only the highest level has legal validity.


=== Norway ===
Candidates are certified by the Association of Government Authorized Translators, after they pass a very demanding examination. Successful candidates are then authorized by the Norwegian government to sign their translations, after the phrase "True Translation Certified." The association was founded in 1913.


=== Poland ===
The standards of translation in Poland are regulated by a relevant department of the Ministry of Justice, and every translator wishing to provide such services must pass a state examination. Afterward such a person is entered on an official list, issued with a stamp, and recognized as a sworn translator. However, for ordinary translations (business, administration, correspondence) it is enough to have an independent expert in the field.


=== South Africa ===
In South Africa, the translator must be authorized by the High Court and must use an original (or a sworn copy of an original) in his physical presence as his source text. The translator may only swear by his own translation. There is no requirement for an additional witness (such as a notary) to attest to the authenticity of the translation.


=== Spain ===
In Spain, a sworn translation is a translation by a translator appointed by the Spanish Ministry of Foreign Affairs, European Union and Cooperation. To become a sworn translator in Spain for a combination of Castilian and another language, the candidate has to be certified by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation as a "sworn translator and interpreter" (traductor-intérprete jurado). Then, the translator is required to register their stamp and signature with the Ministry, who includes the translator's data in a public list of sworn interpreters.
Sworn translators are professional translators (normally individuals who hold a degree in translation and interpretation) who have passed an exam given by the Spanish Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation and are therefore authorized to translate from Spanish into another language and vice versa. Eligibility can be achieved either through a state exam or by completing the degree studies of Translation and Interpretation in a Spanish University, provided that the translator has passed certain law-related subjects.
Sworn translators for combinations including the other three co-official languages of Spain (Basque, Catalan and Galician) are certified by regional authorities following a similar procedure as the Spanish Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
As a rule, all documents submitted in Spain must be translated by a translator certified by the Spanish Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation; however, in many cases, documents translated internationally and submitted to various consulates and embassies can be translated within the respective country by translators certified within the country of submission. In other words, a certified translator in the United States is able to translate documents for one of the Spanish Consulates located in the United States, but not if the documents are to be presented in Spain.


=== Sweden ===
The Legal, Financial and Administrative Services Agency is an official agency that authorizes interpreters and translators, who must pass a stringent examination arranged by the organization. Authorized translators hold a protected professional title, and their translations are considered legal and binding for all legal purposes.


=== United Kingdom ===
In the UK, a certified translation is simply one which comes with a statement made by the translator or translation agency guaranteeing its accuracy, along with the date, the translator's credentials, and contact details. They are often signed and stamped and should be proofread for an added guarantee of accuracy. This is the type of certification that is required by UK government bodies such as the Home Office, Passport Office, and the UK Border Agency, as well as by universities and most foreign embassies in the UK. A certified translation guarantees its accuracy and contains the name and contact number of the translator or project manager, who can vouch for that accuracy and may be contacted by the requesting organization in order to do so.


=== United States ===
A certified translation consists of the source-language text, the target-language text, and a statement signed by the translator or translation company representative that the translator or translation company representative believes the target-language text to be an accurate and complete translation of the source-language text. The signature must be notarized.  There is no federal or state licensing or certification for translators. There are some credentials available to translators but they do not carry the same weight as federal licensing or certification in other countries.


=== United Arab Emirates ===
In the United Arab Emirates (UAE), a certified translation is synonymous with legal translation. legal Translation can be only done by a Ministry of Justice of UAE licensed translator. Every translator has to qualify in the examination held by the Ministry of Justice, UAE for each language pair. A language pair consists of Arabic & a Foreign language. There are legal translators for only 9 foreign languages available in the United Arab Emirates viz. English, French, German, Spanish, Italian, Russian, Chinese, Farsi( also known as Persian), & Turkish. Only legal translations can be notarized, attested, & legalized from the Notary Public of UAE, Ministry of Justice of UAE, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs & International Co-operation, UAE. All Embassies & Consulates located in the United Arab Emirates legalize only legal translations attested by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs & International Co-operation, UAE. For legal translations to be legalized from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs & International Co-operation, UAE it must be at first legalized from the Ministry of Justice of UAE or Notary Public of the UAE. The Ministry of Justice of UAE legalizes only translations made by their licensed translators.


== See also ==
Translation
Legal translation


== References ==


== External links ==
Guide to Translation of Legal Materials.
The administrative state is a term used to describe the power that some government agencies have to write, judge, and enforce their own laws. Since it pertains to the structure and function of government, it is a frequent topic in political science, constitutional law, and public administration.
The phenomenon was relatively unknown in representative democracies before the end of the 1800s. Its sudden rise has generated considerable scholarship, writing, and study to understand its causes and effects, and to square it with previous notions of law and governance.


== Delegation of law-making ==
The administrative state is created when legislative (law-making) bodies, like the U.S. Congress or the U.K. Parliament, delegate their lawmaking powers to administrative or private entities.
Nondelegation is a legal principle that a branch of government cannot authorize another entity to exercise powers or functions assigned to itself. It is sometimes used to argue that the power of administrative agencies to write laws is unconstitutional, illegal, or otherwise invalid, or that it imposes restrictions on administrative agencies in their exercise of these powers.


== Judicial deference ==
The second power of the administrative state comes from judicial deference. In technical terminology, judicial deference is a standard of judicial review that applies when a court defers to an agency's interpretation of a law. Sometimes the law is made by the legislature, and sometimes by the agency itself.
In other words, the agency exercises the same ability of a court to judge and interpret laws. These interpretations bind other courts to arrive at the same interpretation, as long as the interpretation is reasonable, even if an independent court would have arrived at a different interpretation.
This ceding of judicial authority to unelected bodies is the source of considerable scholarship. The power of the administrative state is related to the concept of a privative clause, which also restricts a courts ability to interpret law. While continental civil law systems tend to constrain administrative power through the notion of Rechtsstaat, or a system or rules, common law jurisdictions tend to rely only judicial oversight.


== Law enforcement ==

Many administrative agencies are authorized to enforce their own rules, as well as those of the legislature. This includes the power to issue commands to police, or maintain their own separate police forces.


=== Administrative orders ===
Many agencies have the power to issue commands to police, much like a court order. For example, the BBFC, a British agency with the power to allow or ban films, can issue an order to a "Trade Standards enforcement officer" to seize banned films, but they cannot arrest people. By contrast, the Chinese GAPP can issue decrees to seize banned books, films, writing, or other media, as well as arrest and imprison criminal violations of publication regulations.


=== Police and security forces ===

Many administrative agencies operate their own police forces, with the power to arrest, search, seize items, surveil citizens, and jail them for a period before trial. These police go by a variety of names, including special agents or peace officers in the U.S., enforcement command or "officer with constabulary power" in the U.K., general terms like "officers", civilian police, and specialized terms like les douaniers for French Customs.


== Procedural rights ==
Procedural rights pertain to discussions surrounding individual due process and the position individuals hold in administrative agency adjudications and enforcement measures. These rights also extend to the public's ability to engage in agency rule formulation and decision-making events.
The extent to which administrative due process and procedural rights should be protected within the administrative state remains a contentious issue among policy experts. This discourse largely revolves around differing views on constitutional and statutory obligations related to due process and procedural rights, as well as the extent of these protections when citizens engage with administrative entities.


== Structure, authority and control ==

Although most administrative bodies reside within the executive branch, some are set up as independent entities or fall under the legislative or judicial branches. Such organizational differences influence both the supervision of these agencies and their cross-branch interactions.


=== Executive control ===
The most common power arrangement is control by the executive. This is the case in the United States, where almost all administrative agencies are controlled by the executive.
In this case, leaders of administrative agencies can be removed and reappointed by the executive, but there may be laws that make it difficult or impossible for the executive to fire or restructure the entire agency.


=== Civil service control ===
Leaders of administrative agencies can be directly appointed by the civil service bureaucracy.
This is more common in countries with a powerful civil service, like the United Kingdom; for example, the leadership of Ofcom, Ofqual, and Ofsted are all appointed by the Secretaries of State, career civil servants not elected but promoted from within the civil service's own bureaucracy.


=== Self-regulatory organizations ===
Self-regulatory agencies are controlled by members of the private industries they are supposed to regulate. They are typically professional bodies. Examples include the U.S. Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA), the U.K. Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), the American Medical Association (AMA), medical specialities such as the American Board of Internal Medicine (ABIM), the U.K. Nursing and Midwifery Council (NMC), and the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales. They are typically authorized by special laws that name them as representatives and regulators of their industry.
In this case, leaders of the organization are appointed by professionals, corporations, or other authorized private entities.


=== Directorate control ===
The European Commission is more complicated, and controlled via a directorial system, that is, the president is chosen by the 27 heads of state or government of the European member countries, and confirmed by the European Parliament. The president chooses commissioners to head directorates-general, analogous to ministers at the head of ministries or U.S. cabinet secretaries of executive departments. In the U.S., the legislature writes laws which can be vetoed by the executive, and the veto can be overridden by a two-thirds vote of the legislature. In the E.U., it is reversed: the president writes laws that the European Parliament can veto, but parliament cannot write its own laws, giving the president of the commission legislative power, right of initiative, and an absolute veto over the will of parliament. The European Commission further exercises lawmaking ability directly without parliamentary approval through implementing and delegated acts.


=== Agency-controlled agencies ===
Sometimes, administrative agencies can themselves create other administrative agencies with delegated lawmaking ability; for example, U.S. Congress authorizes the SEC to make 'regulations', and the SEC authorized the self-regulatory organization FINRA to make 'rules', through a process known as "registration". Unlike the SEC, which can make rules at will, FINRA must have their rules approved by the SEC. Laws, regulations, and rules, are all binding on members of the financial industry; however, FINRA rulebreaking is never criminal and thus can not result in jail time.


=== By country ===


==== United States ====

In the United States, almost all federal agencies are ultimately accountable to the executive, and the heads of the agencies can be removed and reappointed at the will of the president.


==== United Kingdom ====

In the U.K., there is an abundance of terminology to describe U.K. governmental and semi-governmental agencies, including executive ministries, non-ministerial government departments (NMGD), non-departmental public body (NDPD), and quango, originally short for "quasi-autonomous non-governmental organization", but which are in fact partly controlled or financed by the government.


== Laws, codes, regulations and rules ==
Laws made by administrative agencies are typically distinguished from laws written by the legislature, and given a separate term like "regulations" or "rules", or referred to in codified form as "codes".
In the U.S., federal regulations are codified into the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), a complement to the compilation of all laws, the U.S. Code (USC). Administrative regulations comprise 242 volumes and more than 185,000 pages, four times larger than the U.S. Code of Laws.


== History ==
Historian Francis Fukuyama traces the concept of a modern administrative state with merit-based hiring to the French Revolution.
In the mid-1800s in the United Kingdom, increased trade activity, rising population, and migration into larger and larger urban hubs caused the social structures that held together traditional administrative arrangements to disintegrate. Urban growth frequently posed the biggest challenges in regions where local administration was least effective. Reflecting on Manchester in 1835, Alexis de Tocqueville observed that "everything in the exterior appearance of the city attests the individual powers of man; nothing the directing powers of society".
Political scientist Ronald J. Pestritto traces U.S. administrative state practices to the Progressive Era and argues that the administrative state runs counter to the U.S. Constitution: "The strong Progressive belief in the enlightenment and disinterestedness of administrators stands as an instructive contrast to the permanent self-interestedness that the Framers of the U.S. Constitution saw in human nature." Pestritto also adds: "This is not to suggest that the Framers denied discretionary power to the national government . . . Rather, they understood that such discretion had to be channeled through the forms and law of the Constitution in order to be safe for liberty." In 1887, the U.S. Congress established its first independent agency, the Interstate Commerce Commission, to regulate railroads.
Pestritto also identifies Woodrow Wilson and Frank Johnson Goodnow as highly influential advocates of administrative law; Wilson was the 26th President of the United States, and Goodnow was founding president of the American Political Science Association. "Like Wilson, Goodnow argued that government needed to adjust its very purpose and organization to accommodate modern necessities," writes Pestritto.
In 1926, future Supreme Court Justice Felix Frankfurter described the process by which government agencies were effectively writing laws, and characterized it as the most important development in law in his time:

The widening area of what in effect is law-making authority, exercised by officials whose actions are not subject to ordinary court review, constitutes perhaps the most striking contemporary tendency of the Anglo-American legal order...These administrative complements are euphemistically called “filling in the details” of a policy set forth in statutes. But the “details” are of the essence...The control of banking, insurance, public utilities, finance, industry, the professions, health and morals, in sum, the manifold response of government to the forces and needs of modern society, is building up a body of laws not written by legislatures, and of adjudications not made by courts and not subject to their revision. These powers are lodged in a vast congeries of agencies. We are in the midst of a process, largely unconscious and certainly unscientific, of adjusting the exercise of these powers to the traditional system of Anglo-American law.
In 1932, the U.S. Supreme Court, in Crowell v. Benson, confirmed the legality of agency decision-making processes, emphasizing the role of agencies in relation to federal courts before the implementation of the Administrative Procedure Act.
In 1935, through the case Humphrey's Executor v. United States, the court characterized independent federal agencies as having both legislative and judicial aspects. The ruling also highlighted the protections these agencies have against presidential removal.
In 1946, the Administrative Procedure Act was introduced by Congress, providing a standard set of guidelines for federal agency decision-making and regulatory actions. This Act detailed both official and unofficial procedures.
"The shift to a more modern administrative state was accompanied by an enormous growth in the size of government during the middle decades of the twentieth century," wrote Fukuyama in 2014.
In 1973, the U.S. Supreme Court, in United States v. Florida East Coast Railway Co., determined that formal procedures are only necessary for agencies if a law mandates a specific type of hearing. This decision led to a rise in the use of less strict processes.
In 1978, with the case Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power Corp. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, the court ruled that judicial bodies cannot dictate extra procedural stipulations to agencies, nor can they nullify agency actions purely based on their disagreement with the outcome.
In 2000, in the case of Appalachian Power Company v. Environmental Protection Agency, the court mandated the EPA to withdraw a guidance document that brought about a regulatory alteration without adhering to mandatory regulatory procedures.
In 2020, in Seila Law v. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, the Supreme Court determined that limitations on the president's authority to dismiss singular leaders of independent federal agencies, in contrast to groups, infringe upon the separation of powers doctrine by curtailing executive oversight of such institutions.


== Supra- and subnational administrative states ==
While common examples of the administrative state are national legislatures delegating lawmaking power to national agencies, there are notable examples of entities within countries and supra-national entities creating administrative states.
The European Union has administrative agencies, often referred to as "bodies" or "agencies," which possess the authority to make specific types of regulations or decisions separate from the primary legislative institutions, the European Parliament and the Council of the European Union. Since EU laws are made by the authority vested in the EU from various treaties ("primary law"), the law that the EU makes can be understood as secondary legislation.
U.S. states have separate sovereignty with independent legislatures that can create agencies with the power to write law, decide cases, and enforce laws through their own police. Examples include the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, whose peace officers have the power to arrest, and the Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation.
The administrative state of countries-within-countries, like Scotland, Wales, or Northern Ireland, can be seen as national or subnational agencies, like the Scottish Environment Protection Agency.
The U.S. Bureau of Indian Affairs administers the territory of semi-sovereign Indian tribes, subnational entities with nation-like characteristics.


== Notable examples ==

Nearly a third the total landmass of the United States is owned by federal agencies, like the BLM, NPS, and NFS, which all maintain separate police forces to enforce laws and determine the use of the land.
In Italy, special Guardie Zoofile rescue animals in distress or protect them in wildlife; these guards are volunteer, private citizens of environmental and animal associations, authorized with the force of the functions and qualifications of the judicial police in animal-welfare matters by Italian law. This power does not include hunting matters. Thus, environmental clubs function as quasi-governmental entities with law enforcement powers delegated by the government.


=== Common examples of police powers ===
Not all administrative agencies maintain their own police; however, there are notable categories of agency that tend to maintain separate security forces.
Tax agencies commonly employ their own police, like the U.S. IRS Criminal Investigation and the Federal Tax Police Service of the Russian Federation. In the U.K., HMRC employs police to carry out uniformed (e.g. combatting misuse of red diesel) and investigative work (in the Criminal Investigation Branch). They exercise the powers granted under the Customs Management Acts and the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, including arrest, search and detention of people and goods.
Immigration agencies also commonly employ their own police, like the U.S. CBP and ICE, the U.K. Border Force and Immigration Enforcement, the Russian Main Directorate for Migration Affairs, and the Indian Bureau of Immigration. These police typically enforce border checkpoints and deport unauthorized foreign nationals within the country.
Environmental agencies employ police, like the Special Agents of the U.S. EPA, the U.K. Environment Agency, Australia's RPNSA, and South Africa's CapeNature Biodiversity Crime Unit. Common activities include stopping pollution criminal violations of environmental law. In Italy, special Guardie Zoofile, volunteers with police powers, rescue animals in distress and protect them in wildlife.
Government land agencies employ police on government lands, like the French National Forests Office, the U.S. Bureau of Land Management, the Australian Fisheries Management Authority. In the Central African Republic, France helped set up special forest rangers and hunting guards for government land management.
Labor agencies employ police, like the U.K. GLAA, the U.S. Department of Labor, and Singapore's Ministry of Manpower. They typically enforce criminal violations of labor law, like the abuse of workers.
Financial agencies employ police with the power of arrest, like Nigeria's Economic and Financial Crimes Commission, U.S. SEC Division of Enforcement. Since financial crimes often includes corruption, in which lawmakers or the police can be involved, financial crime enforcement is sometimes separated.


== See also ==
Administrative history
Constitutional Law
Regulatory state


== Further reading ==
Cassese, Sabino, von Bogdandy, Armin and Huber, Peter, (eds.) The Max Planck Handbooks in European Public Law: The Administrative State. OUP, Oxford, UK. ISBN 9780198726401


== References ==.
An international strait is a narrow natural waterway connecting two parts of the high seas or exclusive economic zones, used for international navigation. Per the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), a transit passage regime prevails in such straits for both ships and aircraft with few exceptions, even when the territorial waters of bordering country or countries overlap. Worldwide, more than 200 straits might satisfy the criteria of an international strait. Notable international straits include the Bosporus and Dardanelles, Strait of Magellan, Strait of Gibraltar, Strait of Dover, Danish straits and the Strait of Hormuz.


== Terminology ==
The term is defined in articles 37 and 38 of the UNCLOS III. The convention does not use the words "international strait" to prevent a confusion with international waters, describing instead the straits used for international navigation.
Some experts suggest a broader definition of the "international strait". In particular, the following list is proposed:

straits used for international navigation with their transit passage regime;
geographic straits where a high seas corridor remains. The territorial waters part of such strait is governed by the innocent passage regime;
straits governed by long-standing conventions. Sailing through such straits is governed by the conventions;
straits where high seas alternatives are of "similar convenience", typically due to the coastal state choosing to keep 3-mile territorial waters thus preserving the high seas regime at the centerline of the strait. In this case only innocent passage is possible in the territorial waters;
straits formed by islands are governed by a non-suspendable innocent passage regime;
archipelagic straits with archipelagic sea lanes passage regime;
dead end straits with innocent passage regime.


== History ==
The interest in the rights of navigation through straits dates as far back as the Peloponnesian War (c. 422 BC). Grotius early in the 17th century recognized the right of the owner of the shore to appropriate the water expanses that can be seen from the shore, and an obligation of the owner to allow innocent (unarmed) navigation through these waters. Grotius also suggested the right for the owner to collect fees for such passage. The latter practice, supported by Puffendorf and later by de Vattel, persisted until the mid-19th century, when Denmark dropped the levies for the passage of Danish belts and sunds (cf. the Copenhagen Convention of 1857 abolishing the Sound Dues that were collected for four hundred years). 
De Vattel was the first to highlight the difference between the straits that "serve as a mean of communication between two [high] seas" and the one without such function. The passage of ships through the former cannot be prohibited as long as it does not adversely affect the security of the coastal state. While Vattel based his ideas on the Roman law concept of right of way, many other 18th century thinkers supported the right of a coastal state to exclude foreign ships from its territorial waters.
With the arrival of steamships in the 19th century, the ability to navigate along the shortest route became a significant economic factor, spurring development of special regimes for transit, similar to high seas. At the same time, a distinction was made between the wartime and peacetime navigation.
A major effort on codification of the legal regime for the straits was made by the Institut de Droit International (IDI) between 1894 and 1912. 1894, in particular, saw the proclamation of the innocent passage principle in those straits where there are no high seas lanes due to overlapping territorial waters. Some work was also done by the International Law Association (ILA) between 1893 and 1910 and Inter-Parliamentary Union between 1910 and 1915. Like the IDI's declarations, these efforts were stopped by the First World War, no international agreements followed, and the discussion at the Second Peace Conference (1907) only made it clear that the international straits require their own regime. No agreement was reached at the 1930 Hague Conference on Codification either. Overall, per the 1992 statement of the Office for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea, "the treatment of the question of straits [...] between 1894 and 1930 was unsatisfactory". 
The "now classic" book on international straits by Erik Brüel, International Straits. A Treatise on International Law, was published in the 1947.

The Corfu Channel case at the International Court of Justice (ICJ) in 1949 established the rules for the innocent passage through a strait:

the international strait is defined geographically by being a connection between two areas of high seas, it does not have to be a route heavily used by international shipping;
warships have the right of innocent passage through such strait that cannot be denied or subject to conditions in peacetime.
Still, the incident that was considered in the case had shown the limits of innocent passage: the rules of this regime makes the warships participating in the freedom of navigation operation vulnerable in case of encounter with the navy of a coastal state.

The Convention on the Territorial Sea and the Contiguous Zone, adopted in 1958 by UNCLOS I, codified the work of the International Law Commission done since 1949. Regarding the straits, the convention introduced a non-suspendable innocent passage for those international straits connecting high seas to a territorial sea of a foreign state. Otherwise, international straits were governed by the same innocent passage provisions as other territorial waters.
Major changes to strait passage were made by UNCLOS III (1982) that were driven both by objective factors (a dramatic increase in sea and air traffic, concerns about pollution and accidents in straits, and the general desire of coastal states to increase their territorial sea to 12 nautical miles) and the common interest of the United States and Soviet Union in opening sea and air passage through the international straits. Although during the planning of the conference it was declared that it will concentrate on the exploitation of sea beds, in practice it was to large extent driven by the desire of "the United States and the Soviet Union [...] to protect their strategic interests in transiting the oceans, particularly international straits". As a result of political compromise, UNCLOS III adopted its "crowning achievement", a new transit passage regime with no previous legal precedents. This regime provided the coastal states with much less enforcement ability in the straits.


== References ==


== Sources ==
Alexander, Lewis M. (1991). "International straits". In Robertson, Horace B. Jr. (ed.). The Law of Naval Operations. International law studies. Vol. 64. pp. 91–108.
Brovka, Yu. P. (2009). "Международный пролив" [International strait] (PDF). Белорусская юридическая энциклопедия [Belorussian law encyclopedia] (in Russian). Минск: ГИУСТ БГУ. p. 223.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: publisher location (link)
SJ Advocate (2021). "International Straits". International Law Studies. 97. Stockton Center for International Law: 39–44. ISSN 2375-2831.
López Martín, Ana G. (2010). International Straits: Concept, Classification and Rules of Passage. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-642-12906-3. Retrieved 2024-08-29.
Law, Jonathan, ed. (2022-03-17). "international strait". A Dictionary of Law (10th ed.). Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford Quick Reference. ISBN 978-0-19-289749-7.
Priestnall, Graham (1997). "The Regimes of Archipelagic Sea Lanes Passage and Straits' Transit Passage – Similarities and Differences". Maritime Studies. 1997 (96): 1–12. doi:10.1080/07266472.1997.10878494. ISSN 0726-6472.
Oral, Nilufer (2019). "Navigating the Oceans: Old and New Challenges for the Law of the Sea for Straits Used for International Navigation". Ecology Law Quarterly. 46 (1). University of California, Berkeley: 163–190. ISSN 0046-1121. JSTOR 26853549. Retrieved 2024-08-31.
Bugajski, Dariusz R. (2021). Navigational rights and freedoms in the international law and practice. Akademia Marynarki Wojennej. p. 89. ISBN 978-83-961549-1-0. OCLC 1267382284..
In international law, a stateless person is someone who is "not considered as a national by any state under the operation of its law". Some stateless people are also refugees. However, not all refugees are stateless, and many people who are stateless have never crossed an international border. At the end of 2022, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees published an estimation of 4.4 million people worldwide as either stateless or of undetermined nationality, 90,800 (+2%) more than at the end of 2021. However, the data itself is not complete because UNHCR does not have data from many countries, such as from at least 22 countries where mass statelessness exists. The data also does not include de facto stateless people who have no legal identification to prove their nationality or legal existence. According to the World Bank, at least 850 million fit that category.
The status of a person who might be stateless ultimately depends on the viewpoint of the state with respect to the individual or a group of people. In some cases, the state makes its view clear and explicit; in others, its viewpoint is harder to discern. In those cases, one may need to rely on prima facie evidence of the view of the state, which in turn may give rise to a presumption of statelessness.


== Causes ==


=== Conflict of law ===
Conflicting nationality laws are one of the main causes of "stateless births". At birth, nationality is usually acquired through one of two modes, although many nations recognize both modes today:

Jus soli ('right of soil') denotes a regime by which nationality is acquired through birth on the territory of the state. This is common in the Americas.
Jus sanguinis ('right of blood') is a regime by which nationality is acquired through descent, usually from a parent who is a national. Almost all states in Europe, Asia, Africa, and Oceania grant nationality at birth based upon the principle of jus sanguinis.
A person who has neither parent eligible to transmit nationality by jus sanguinis is "born stateless" if born in a state which does not recognize jus soli. For example, if that child were born in India and neither parent had naturalized yet, then the child could be stateless, since India confers nationality only to children born to at least one Indian parent.


=== Gender discrimination in jus sanguinis ===
Although most states allow the acquisition of nationality through parental descent irrespective of where the child is born, some do not allow female citizens to confer nationality to their children. As of 2022, women in 24 countries, mostly in Africa and Asia, are legally restricted from transmitting their nationality onto their offspring. This can result in statelessness when the father is stateless, unknown, or otherwise unable to confer nationality to the child born to the unnaturalized mother in a foreign country without unrestricted jus soli. Beginning around 2003, there have been changes in favor of sex neutrality in nationality laws in some nations, including reforms in Algeria, Morocco, and Senegal that may inform change elsewhere. For example, Algeria amended its nationality code in 2005 to grant Algerian nationality to children born in or outside Algeria to an Algerian mother or father. Moreover, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women prohibits sex-based discrimination in the conferral of nationality.
An important measure to prevent statelessness at birth bestows nationality to children born in a territory who would otherwise be stateless. This norm is stipulated in the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness; appears in several regional human rights treaties, including the American Convention on Human Rights, the European Convention on Nationality, and the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child; and is implicit in the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child.


=== Ethnicity ===
Many states define their body of citizens based on ethnicity, leading to the exclusion of large groups. This violates international laws against discrimination. The United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination stated on October 1, 2014, that the "deprivation of citizenship on the basis of race, colour, descent, or national or ethnic origin is a breach of States' obligations to ensure non-discriminatory enjoyment of the right to nationality".


=== State succession ===
In some cases, statelessness is a consequence of state succession. Some people become stateless when their state of nationality ceases to exist, or when the territory on which they live comes under the control of another state. This was the case after the Soviet Union had disintegrated in 1991, and also in the cases of Yugoslavia, East Pakistan and Ethiopia. According to the United Nations Office of Legal Affairs, the Council of Europe Convention on the Avoidance of Statelessness in Relation to State Succession is the only treaty that aims to reduce this problem. Seven states have joined it.


=== Political or religious conflicts ===
Many Muslim or Christian Palestinians fled Israel from 1947–1950. In 1950, the newly formed state of Israel introduced a Law of Return that gave Jews the right to become citizens with voting rights shortly after immigration. However, the same right to return was not given to the many Palestinians who fled from 1947–1950, causing many of them to become stateless.  In December 1948, the UN approved United Nations General Assembly Resolution 194, which affirmed that "refugees wishing to return to their homes and live at peace with their neighbours should be permitted to do so at the earliest practicable date".


=== Administrative obstacles ===
People may also become stateless as a result of administrative and practical problems, especially when they are from a group whose nationality is questioned. Individuals might be entitled to citizenship but unable to undertake the necessary procedural steps. They may be required to pay excessive fees for documentation proving nationality, to provide documentation that is not available to them, or to meet unrealistic deadlines; or they may face geographic or literacy barriers.
In disruptive conflict or post-conflict situations, many people find that difficulties in completing simple administrative procedures are exacerbated. Such obstacles may affect the ability of individuals to complete procedures such as birth registration, fundamental to the prevention of statelessness in children. Whilst birth registration alone does not confer citizenship on a child, the documentation of place of birth and parentage is instrumental in proving the link between an individual and a state for the acquisition of nationality. The United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) estimated in 2013 that 230 million children under the age of 5 have not been registered.
Not holding proof of nationality—being "undocumented"—is not the same as being stateless, but the lack of identity documents such as a birth certificate can lead to statelessness. Millions of people live, or have lived, their entire lives with no documents, without their nationality ever being questioned.
Two factors are of particular importance:

whether the nationality in question was acquired automatically or through some form of registration
whether the person has ever been denied documents on the basis that they are not a national.
If nationality is acquired automatically, the person is a national regardless of documentation status (although in practice, the person may face problems accessing certain rights and services because they are undocumented, not because they are stateless). If registration is required, then the person is not a national until that process has been completed.
As a practical matter, the longer a person is undocumented, the greater the likelihood that they will end up in a situation where no state recognizes them as a national.


=== Renunciation ===
In rare cases, individuals may become stateless upon renouncing their citizenship (e.g., "world citizen" Garry Davis and, from 1896 to 1901, Albert Einstein, who, in January 1896, at the age of 16, renounced his Württemberg citizenship to avoid conscription; in February 1901 his application for Swiss citizenship was accepted). People who ascribe to Voluntaryist, Agorist, or some other philosophical, political, or religious beliefs may desire or seek statelessness (ideological statelessness). Many states do not allow citizens to renounce their nationality unless they acquire another. However, consular officials are unlikely to be familiar with the citizenship laws of all countries, so there may still be situations where renunciation leads to effective statelessness.
Some may even desire statelessness to avoid future military duties by having a citizenship, or to avoid citizenship-based taxation practiced by countries like the US.


=== Non-state territories ===
Only states can have nationals, and people of non-state territories may be stateless. This includes for instance residents of occupied territories where statehood never emerged in the first place, has ceased to exist and/or is largely unrecognized. Examples include the Western Sahara region. People who are recognized to be citizens by the government of an unrecognized country may not consider themselves stateless, but nevertheless may be widely regarded as such especially if other countries refuse to honor passports issued by an unrecognized state.


=== Stateless nations ===
A stateless nation is an ethnic group or nation that does not possess its own state. The term "stateless" implies that the group "should have" such a state (country). The term was coined in 1983 by the political scientist Jacques Leruez in his book L'Écosse, une nation sans État about the peculiar position of Scotland within the British state. It was later adopted and popularized by Scottish scholars such as David McCrone, Michael Keating and T. M. Devine. A notable contemporary example of a stateless nation is the Kurds. The Kurdish population is estimated to be between 30 and 45 million, but they do not have a recognized sovereign state. Members of stateless nations are often not necessarily personally stateless as individuals, as they are frequently recognized as citizens of one or more recognized state(s).


== History ==

While statelessness in some form has existed continuously throughout human history, the international community has only been concerned with its eradication since the middle of the 20th century. In 1954, the United Nations adopted the Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons, which provides a framework for the protection of stateless people. Seven years later, the United Nations adopted the Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness. In addition, a range of regional and international human rights treaties guarantee a right to nationality, with special protections for certain groups, including stateless persons.


=== In antiquity ===

In a historical sense, statelessness could reasonably be considered to be the default human condition that existed universally from the evolution of human species to the emergence of the first human civilizations. Historically in every inhabited region on Earth, prior the emergence of states as polities humans organized into tribal groups. In the absence of written laws, people living in tribal settings were typically expected to adhere to tribal customs and owed allegiance to their tribe and/or tribal leaders. As states began to form, a distinction developed between those who had some form of legal attachment to a more complex polity recognized to be a state in contrast to those who did not. The latter, often living in tribes and in regions not yet organized into and/or conquered by more powerful states, would widely be considered to be stateless in a modern sense. Historically, there is considerable correlation between those who would meet the modern definition of statelessness and those the contemporary ruling classes of the extant states would have deemed to be mere barbarians.
However, civilizations of this period more often distinguished between a subject and a slave as opposed to between a citizen and a subject. In many monarchies, the concept of citizenship as something distinct from that of a subject did not exist – people under a monarch's rule who were considered subjects typically enjoyed more rights than a slave, and would presumably not have been considered "stateless" by the monarch. But even slaves in a monarchical state were often considered to have a legal status more desirable, at least from the perspective of the ruler, compared to those living outside the frontiers in tribal settings who were typically regarded as barbarians. Depending on the circumstances, a monarch seeking to conquer a frontier region would seek to either subjugate or enslave the inhabitants, but either would impart on the conquered population a change from stateless barbarian to some form of legal status in which allegiance and/or obedience to the ruler could be expected.
With the emergence of the concept of citizenship in the Greco-Roman world, the status of slaves and inhabitants of conquered territories during Classical antiquity became in some ways analogous to contemporary statelessness. In antiquity, such "statelessness" affected captive and subject populations denied full citizenship, including those enslaved (e.g., conquered populations excluded from Roman citizenship, such as the Gauls immediately following the Gallic Wars, or the Israelites under Babylonian captivity). However, there was a major difference between captive and subject populations in contrast to those living outside the boundaries of cohesive states – while both could be considered stateless, the latter typically only needed to adhere to local tribal customs whereas the former were not only expected to obey the laws of the state they were living in, but were often subjected to laws not imposed on and punishments not inflicted on full citizens. Among the more widely-known examples of this was the Romans' frequent use of crucifixion to punish Roman subjects, considered to be a highly degrading form of capital punishment that could not legally be inflicted on Roman citizens.


=== Before World War II ===
Some characteristics of statelessness could be observed among apostates and slaves in Islamic society (the former shunned for rejecting their religious birth identity, the latter having been separated from that identity and subsumed into an underclass). Statelessness also used to characterize the Romani people, whose traditional nomadic lifestyles meant that they traveled across lands claimed by others.
The Nansen International Office for Refugees was an international organization of the League of Nations in charge of refugees from 1930 to 1939. It received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1938. Nansen passports, designed in 1922 by founder Fridtjof Nansen, were internationally recognized identity cards issued to stateless refugees. In 1942, they were honored by governments in 52 countries.
Many Jews became stateless before and during the Holocaust, because the Nuremberg laws of 1935 stripped them of their German citizenship.


=== After World War II ===
The United Nations (UN) was set up in 1945, immediately after the end of World War II. From its inception, the UN had to deal with the mass atrocities of the war, including the huge refugee populations across Europe. To address the nationality and legal status of these refugees, the United Nations Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) requested that the UN Secretary-General carry out a study of statelessness in 1948.
In 1948, the Universal Declaration on Human Rights (UDHR) was adopted. It provided both a right to asylum (Article 14) and a right to nationality (Article 15). The declaration also expressly prohibited arbitrary deprivation of nationality, which had affected many of the wartime refugees.
In 1949, the International Law Commission put "Nationality, including statelessness", on its list of topics of international law provisionally selected for codification. In 1950, at the behest of ECOSOC, that item was given priority, and ECOSOC appointed an ad hoc Committee on Refugees and Stateless People to draft a convention. A treaty on refugees was prepared with a draft protocol addressing the status of stateless persons.
The Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees was adopted on July 28, 1951. As of January 2005, it had attracted the signatures of 145 state parties. Since the International Refugee Organization—the predecessor to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)—was in the process of being dissolved, the convention was adopted without the protocol addressing statelessness.
The International Law Commission, at its fifth session in 1953, produced both a Draft Convention on the Elimination of Future Statelessness and a Draft Convention on the Reduction of Future Statelessness. ECOSOC approved both drafts. In 1954, the UN adopted the Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons. This convention provided a definition of a stateless person (which has since become part of customary international law, according to the International Law Commission) and set out a number of rights that stateless persons should enjoy. The convention thus became the basis for an international protection regime for stateless persons. However, to ensure that the rights enumerated in the convention are protected, states need to be able to identify stateless individuals.
Seven years later, in 1961—only one year after the 1954 convention entered into force—the UN adopted the Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness.
In 2014, following a series of expert meetings, UNHCR issued a Handbook on Protection of Stateless Persons.
Stateless refugees covered by the 1951 convention should be treated in accordance with international refugee laws. As of September 1, 2015, 86 states were party to the 1954 convention, up from 65 when UNHCR launched its conventions campaign in 2011.


=== Statelessness since 1961 ===
On December 13, 1975, the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness entered into force. It provides a number of standards regarding acquisition and loss of nationality, including automatic loss, renunciation, and deprivation of nationality.
In 1974, the UN General Assembly (UNGA) requested that UNHCR undertake the functions established by the Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness. While the convention had only 37 state parties on January 1, 2011, 33 states pledged to accede to it at a ministerial event organized by UNHCR in December 2011. As of September 1, 2015, the number of state parties had increased to 64.
States bound by the 1989 Convention on the Rights of the Child are obligated to ensure that every child acquires a nationality. The convention requires states to implement this provision in particular where the child would otherwise be stateless, and in a manner that is in the best interests of the child.
Starting in 1994, the UNHCR Executive Committee (ExCom) and the UNGA asked UNHCR to broaden its activities concerning statelessness to include all states. In 1996, UNHCR was asked by the UNGA to actively promote accessions to the 1954 and 1961 conventions, as well as to provide interested states with technical and advisory services pertaining to the preparation and implementation of nationality legislation.
An internal evaluation released in 2001 suggested that UNHCR had done little to exercise its mandate on statelessness. Only two individuals were tasked with overseeing work in that area at UNHCR headquarters, though some field officers had been trained to address the issue. The evaluation also noted that there was no dedicated budget line.
Concerned organisations such as the Open Society Justice Initiative and Refugees International have called for UNHCR to dedicate more human and financial resources to statelessness. In 2006, a statelessness unit (now a statelessness section) was established in Geneva, and staffing has increased both in headquarters and in the field. As part of an overhaul of UNHCR's budget structure in 2010, the budget dedicated to statelessness increased from approximately US$12 million in 2009 to $69.5 million in 2015.
In addition to regular staff in regional and country offices, UNHCR has regional statelessness officers in Dakar, Senegal, for West Africa; Nairobi, Kenya, for the Horn of Africa; Pretoria, South Africa, for Southern Africa; San José, Costa Rica, for the Americas; Bangkok, Thailand, for Asia and the Pacific; Almaty, Kazakhstan, for Central Asia; Brussels, Belgium, for Europe; and Amman, Jordan, for the Middle East and North Africa.
In 2004, ExCom instructed UNHCR to pay particular attention to situations of protracted statelessness and to explore, in cooperation with states, measures that would ameliorate and end these situations. In 2006, it provided UNHCR with more specific guidance on how to implement its mandate. The Conclusion on Identification, Prevention and Reduction of Statelessness and Protection of Stateless Persons requires UNHCR to work with governments, other UN agencies, and civil society to address statelessness. UNHCR's activities are currently categorized as identification, prevention, reduction, and protection.
UNHCR has achieved some success with campaigns to prevent and reduce statelessness among peoples in the Crimean peninsula (Armenians, Crimean Tatars, Germans, and Greeks) who were deported en masse at the close of World War II. Another success has been the naturalization of Tajik refugees in Kyrgyzstan, as well as campaigns that have enabled 300,000 Tamils to acquire Sri Lankan citizenship. UNHCR also helped the Czech Republic reduce the large number of stateless persons created when it separated from Slovakia.
At the beginning of 2006, the UNHCR reported that it had records of 2.4 million stateless persons, and estimated that there were 11 million worldwide. By the end of 2014, UNHCR had identified close to 3.5 million stateless persons in 77 countries and estimated the total number worldwide to be more than 10 million.
UNHCR does not report refugee populations in its statelessness statistics to avoid double counting, which would affect the total number of "persons of concern". Stateless refugees are counted as refugees, not as stateless. For the same reason, Palestinian refugees under the mandate of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) are not reported in the UNHCR statelessness table. Instead, they are referred to elsewhere in UNHCR's statistical reporting.
While the two UN conventions on statelessness constitute the primary international framework for the protection of stateless persons and the reduction of statelessness, there are also regional instruments of great importance. The 1997 European Convention on Nationality, for example, has contributed to protecting the rights of stateless persons and provides standards for reducing statelessness in the Council of Europe region. That document emphasizes the need of every person to have a nationality, and seeks to clarify the rights and responsibilities of states in ensuring individual access to a nationality.
Some of the largest populations of stateless persons are found in Algeria, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Cambodia, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Dominican Republic, Estonia, India, Ivory Coast, Kenya, Latvia, Malaysia, Mauritania, Myanmar, Nepal, Brunei, Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, the United Arab Emirates, Kuwait, Qatar, Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, and Thailand.


== Notable cases ==


=== Airports ===
Some stateless people have received widespread public attention in airports due to their status as ports of entry.
One famous case is that of Mehran Karimi Nasseri, who lived in Charles de Gaulle Airport in France for approximately 18 years after he was denied entry to the country. His Iranian passport and UN refugee documents had been stolen. He may have had a British mother, but he did not have British citizenship. The 1994 French film Tombés du ciel and the 2004 American film The Terminal are fictional stories inspired by his experiences.


=== During change of citizenship ===
Countries that restrict multiple nationality often require immigrants who apply for naturalisation to obtain official documentation from their countries of origin proving that they are no longer citizens. In others, including Taiwan, the documentation must be provided prior to the granting of citizenship. During the period between the cancellation of the prior citizenship and the granting of the new citizenship by naturalization, the applicant may be officially stateless. In two cases in Taiwan, Pakistani immigrants applied for naturalization and renounced their Pakistani citizenship. In the interim, the decisions to permit their naturalization as citizens of Taiwan were reversed, leaving them stateless.


== By country ==


=== Australia ===
As of 30 April 2017, Australia had 37 stateless people in onshore detention, who had been detained for an average of 2 years and 106 days and the longest was 3 years and 250 days. The number of stateless people in offshore detention is unknown. There were a further 57 stateless people living in the community after being approved for a residence determination. In Australia, statelessness is not itself a ground for grant of a visa and the person must instead rely upon other grounds, such as being a refugee. Notable cases include:

Ahmed Al-Kateb, a Palestinian man born in Kuwait who was denied a visa on arrival in Australia in 2000 and did not meet the requirements of a refugee. Al-Kateb wished to return to Kuwait or Gaza. However, Kuwait would not accept him (as he was not a Kuwait citizen or resident) and there was no state of Palestine recognized by Australia at that time. To return him to Gaza required the approval of Israel. The High Court of Australia held in Al-Kateb v Godwin that his detention was lawful, even though it would continue indefinitely. Al-Kateb and eight other stateless people were granted bridging visas in 2005 and, while this meant they were released from detention, they were unable to work, study or obtain various government benefits. Al-Kateb was granted a permanent visa in October 2007.
'Baby Ferouz' was born in November 2013 to Rohingya Muslim parents who had fled from Myanmar, which did not recognise them as citizens. His parents and siblings were being held at the Nauru Detention Centre, however the family was flown to Brisbane due to complications in pregnancy, with the result that baby Ferouz was born in Australia. From 1986, Australia has not automatically granted citizenship to people born in Australia, despite the provision in the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness requiring nationality to be given to children born in a territory who would otherwise be stateless. As baby Ferouz was deemed to be an unauthorised maritime arrival, he could not be given a protection visa. In December 2014 he and his family were given a temporary protection visa which allowed them to be released from immigration detention.
Said Imasi is believed to be from Western Sahara and had been granted a protection visa in Norway in 2004. In January 2010 he had a one-way ticket to New Zealand and was traveling on a friend's passport and was detained on a stop-over in Melbourne. His application for a refugee visa was refused because he did not have a "well-founded fear of persecution" in Norway. Because he has no visa to be in Australia and there is no country to which he can be returned, Imasi has been in immigration detention since January 2010, spending several years at the Christmas Island Detention Centre and later at the Villawood Immigration Detention Centre in Sydney. As of May 2023, Imasi has been released under unknown conditions.


=== Bahrain ===
Many individuals in Bahrain, called Bidoon, do not have a nationality. A number of people have also had their citizenship revoked and are now stateless; the revocation took place after they criticised the Bahraini government. This situation also occurs in other Middle Eastern countries.


=== Brazil ===

Brazil is among the few countries in the world to have in its law the recognition of a stateless person to provide documents to this person as an official citizen of the country. Maha and Souad Mamo, who had lived in Brazil for four years as refugees, were the first stateless persons recognized by the Brazilian state after the creation of the new migration law (Law No. 13,445), which came into force in 2017. The migration law provides protective measures for stateless persons, facilitating the guarantees of social inclusion and simplified naturalization for citizens without a homeland. The legislation follows international conventions of respect for stateless persons and seeks to reduce the number of people in this situation, giving the right to request nationality. Countries having similar laws usually offer stateless persons the access to basic rights such as education and health, while in their documents they are still recognized as stateless with a residence permit. With its law, Brazil offers naturalization, which means that these persons can by all effects become Brazilians. If the stateless persons do not wish to apply for immediate naturalization, they are granted at least definitive residency in the country.


=== Brunei ===
Many stateless permanent residents live in Brunei. Most have lived on Bruneian soil for generations, but Bruneian nationality is governed by the policy of jus sanguinis; the right to hold it comes from blood ties. The government of Brunei has made obtaining citizenship possible, albeit difficult, for stateless persons who have inhabited Brunei for many generations. Requirements include rigorous tests in Malay culture, customs, and language. Stateless permanent residents of Brunei are given an International Certificate of Identity, which allows them to travel overseas. The majority of Brunei's Chinese and Indians are permanent residents who are stateless.
Holders of International Certificates of Identity can enter Germany and Hungary visa-free for a maximum of 90 days within a 180-day period. In the case of Germany, in theory, for an individual to benefit from the visa exemption, the ICI must be issued under the terms of the 1954 Convention Relating to the Status of Stateless Persons, and it must contain an authorization to return to Brunei with a sufficiently long period of validity.
Brunei is a signatory to the 1959 Declaration of the Rights of the Child, which states that "the child shall be entitled from his birth to a name and a nationality", but it does not currently follow the guidelines of the convention. The Sultan of Brunei has announced changes that may expedite the process by which stateless persons with permanent residence status sit for citizenship exams.


=== Canada ===
An amendment to the Canadian Citizenship Act (S.C. 2008, c. 14, previously Bill C-37) came into effect on April 17, 2009, and changed the rules for the acquisition of foreign-born Canadian citizenship. Individuals born outside Canada can now become Canadian citizens by descent only if at least one of their parents was either a native-born citizen or a naturalised citizen of Canada.
The new law limits citizenship by descent to one generation born outside Canada. All individuals born within one generation of the native-born or naturalised citizen parent are automatically recognised as Canadian citizens, but second-generation descendants born abroad are no longer citizens of Canada at birth, and such individuals might be stateless if they have no claim to any other citizenship. Since the passage of Bill C-37, this situation has already occurred at least twice:

Rachel Chandler was born in China, to a Libyan-born father who is a Canadian citizen through the provision in the above paragraph and a mother who is a Chinese citizen. Because of the nationality laws of Canada and China, she was not eligible for citizenship in either country and was apparently born stateless. However, because Chandler's paternal grandfather was born in Ireland, she was entitled to Irish citizenship and now holds an Irish passport.
Chloé Goldring was born in Belgium, to a Canadian father born in Bermuda and an Algerian mother. She was not eligible for automatic citizenship in Algeria, Belgium, or Canada, and was thus born stateless. Goldring is now a Canadian citizen.
Under Bill C-37, the term "native-born" is construed strictly: children born outside of Canada to Canadian government employees working abroad, including diplomats and Canadian Forces personnel, are considered foreign-born.
The bill was intended to resolve the status of so-called "Lost Canadians"—people who considered themselves Canadians, with undeniable connections to the country, but who had either lost or never been granted citizenship because of the vagaries of the country's previous nationality law.


=== Dominican Republic ===
An estimated 800,000 Haitians reside in the Dominican Republic. For much of its history, the Dominican Republic had a jus soli policy, meaning that all children born in the country, even to undocumented parents, were automatically given citizenship. Most countries in the Western Hemisphere practice this policy, but in June 2013, the Dominican high court amended existing legislation to exclude from jus soli citizenship children born "in transit", such as the children of foreign diplomats and "those on their way to another country". Since 2013, the law has been expanded to address the children of non-citizens, such as Haitian migrants who immigrated after 1929.
Since the passing of the amendment, nearly 200,000 Dominicans of Haitian descent have been stripped of their Dominican citizenship. Without birth certificates, identification, or nationality, they are stateless and living illegally in the Dominican Republic. As of July 2015, according to the International Organization for Migration, about 1,133 individuals had voluntarily or involuntarily relocated to Haiti. By law, many are eligible to apply for naturalised citizenship in either Haiti or the Dominican Republic, but financial, bureaucratic, and discriminatory obstacles have prevented many from doing so.


=== Estonia and Latvia ===

Estonia and Latvia, two neighboring European countries, became independent from the Russian Empire in 1918, fell under Soviet occupation from 1940 until German occupation in 1941 and then again under renewed Soviet Occupation after 1944. When their independence was restored in 1991, citizenship was automatically restored to individuals who had been Latvian citizens prior to June 18, 1940, and their descendants or Estonian citizens prior to June 16, 1940, and their descendants.  Citizens of the Soviet Union who had moved to Estonia or Latvia while they were occupied by the Soviet Union did not receive citizenship automatically in 1991, and neither did their descendants. They had to apply for naturalisation as immigrants, a process that included a knowledge test and a language test in Estonian or Latvian. Children born after Latvia re-established independence (August 21, 1991), to parents who are both non-citizens, are also entitled to citizenship at the request of at least one of the parents.
These criteria mainly excluded ethnic Russians, Ukrainians, Belorussians, and other ethnic minorities. Thousands of ethnic Latvians and Estonians were also impacted and became stateless. Russia has a visa waiver for stateless persons living in Estonia and Latvia, while Estonian and Latvian citizens need to obtain a visa to enter Russia. These stateless persons can also travel freely within the Schengen area, but they are not permitted to work within the European Union. As of 2013, more than 267,000 residents of Latvia and 91,000 residents of Estonia were stateless.


=== Greece ===
Article 19 of the Greek Citizenship Code (Law 3370 of 1955) stated: "A person of non-Greek ethnic origin leaving Greece without the intention of returning may be declared as having lost Greek citizenship. This also applies to a person of non-Greek ethnic origin born and domiciled abroad. Minor children living abroad may be declared as having lost Greek citizenship if both their parents, or the surviving parent, have lost it as well." (The Minister of the Interior decides such cases, with the concurring opinion of the Citizenship Council.).
Article 19 was abolished in 1998, but no provision was established for restoring citizenship to people who had lost it. Interior Minister Alekos Papadopoulos stated that, since the article's introduction in 1955, 60,000 Greeks had lost their citizenship because of it, many of these people moved and adopted the nationality of another country. However, an estimated 300–1,000 people remain stateless in Greece (primarily minorities in Thrace, some of whom never settled abroad) and other former Greek citizens are stateless outside the country (an estimated 1,400 in Turkey and an unknown number elsewhere).
Stateless individuals in Greece have had difficulty receiving social services like health care and education. Until December 1997, they were denied the protection of the 1954 U.N. Convention Relating to the Status of Stateless Persons, which Greece ratified in 1975. Then, as a result of pressure from nongovernmental organizations and minority deputies, around 100 ethnic Turks made stateless under Article 19 received identity documents from Greek authorities in accordance with the 1954 U.N. Convention. In August 1998, Foreign Minister Theodoros Pangalos stated that within a year, most or all stateless persons living in Greece would be offered Greek citizenship; this promise was repeated in subsequent months by Alternate and Deputy Foreign Ministers George Papandreou and Giannos Kranidiotis. However, the government took no steps to carry out this promise.


=== Hong Kong ===

Hong Kong, as a special administrative region of China, does not have its own citizenship laws. The right of abode is the status that allows unrestricted right to live, work, vote and to hold most public office in Hong Kong; persons with right of abode in Hong Kong are called permanent residents. Most permanent residents of Chinese descent are Chinese citizens as provided by the Chinese nationality law. Citizens of other countries who have obtained right of abode in Hong Kong remain the citizens of their respective countries, and enjoy all the rights accorded to permanent residents except for those restricted to permanent residents with Chinese citizenship, such as the right to a HKSAR passport and the eligibility to be elected for all political offices except as members for 12 functional constituencies. 
When Hong Kong was transferred from the United Kingdom to China on July 1, 1997, all British Dependent Territories citizens (BDTCs) connected to Hong Kong lost their British nationality, unless they had applied for the British National (Overseas) (BN(O)) status. Most BDTCs of Chinese descent became Chinese citizens. BDTCs who did not become Chinese citizens and did not apply for BN(O) status while holding no other citizenship became British Overseas citizens (BOCs). As BN(O) and BOC statuses do not provide right of abode in the United Kingdom, BN(O)s and BOCs of non-Chinese descent who do not hold any other citizenship are de facto stateless. However, British nationality law allows BN(O)s and BOCs who are otherwise stateless to register for full British citizenship. In addition, the Chinese nationality law as applied in Hong Kong provides the option of naturalisation as a Chinese national.
Chinese citizens from the mainland who had migrated to Hong Kong on a One-way Permit lose their mainland hukou (household registration). They then must reside in Hong Kong for 7 years before gaining the right of abode in Hong Kong. Therefore, persons who had migrated out of the mainland but have not obtained Hong Kong permanent residency, while technically not stateless, are unable to exercise rights and privileges associated with citizenship in either the mainland or Hong Kong.
Stateless permanent residents of Hong Kong and Chinese migrants without right of abode may apply for a Hong Kong Document of Identity for Visa Purposes, which allows them to travel overseas. This document (with few exceptions) requires the holder to apply for and receive a travel visa prior to departure from Hong Kong.
Children born to foreign domestic workers are not classified as citizens because Chinese nationality is determined by blood ties. Under the visa regulations governing foreign domestic workers, the government of Hong Kong may award an unconditional stay visa. Many of these children can obtain citizenship in their parents' country of birth. When they are put up for adoption, however, citizenship applications can become challenging. In cases where both adoptive parents are Chinese nationals, the children will likely remain stateless. Applying for Chinese citizenship by naturalisation is only possible for permanent residents of Hong Kong, and an unconditional stay visa does not grant this status.
Eliana Rubashkyn, a transgender woman and refugee, became de facto stateless in 2013 after being detained for over eight months on the grounds that her appearance did not match her passport photo. She suffered mistreatment in detention at Chek Lap Kok Airport and in Kowloon's Queen Elizabeth Hospital. She was granted refugee status, but Hong Kong did not recognize her as a refugee because it is not a signatory to the refugee convention of 1951 and sought to deport her to Colombia. In 2013, the UN sought a third country to resettle her due to the lack of protections for LGBT people and refugees in Hong Kong. After almost one year, a UN declaration recognized her as a woman under international law, and she was sent to New Zealand, where she received asylum.


=== South Asia ===

As of 2012, India and Pakistan were each holding several hundred prisoners from the other for violations like trespass or visa overstay, often with accusations of espionage. Some of these prisoners have been denied citizenship in both countries, leaving them stateless. In Pakistani law, if one leaves the country for more than seven years without any registration from a Pakistani embassy or foreign mission of any country, they lose Pakistani citizenship.
In 2012, the BBC reported on the case of Muhammad Idrees, who lived in Pakistan and had been held under Indian police control for approximately 13 years for overstaying his 15-day visa by 2–3 days after seeing his ill parents in 1999. He spent much of those 13 years in prison waiting for a hearing, sometimes homeless or living with volunteer families. Both states denied him citizenship.
The BBC linked these problems to the political atmosphere caused by the Kashmir conflict. The Indian People's Union for Civil Liberties told the BBC it had worked on hundreds of cases with similar features. It called Idrees' case a "violation of all human rights, national and international laws", adding, "Everybody has a right to a nation." The Indian Human Rights Law Network blamed "officials in the home department" and slow courts, and called the case a "miscarriage of justice, a shocking case".
In Bangladesh, about 300,000–500,000 Bihari people (also known as Stranded Pakistanis in Bangladesh) were rendered stateless when Bangladesh seceded from Pakistan in 1971. Bangladesh refused to consider them citizens because of their support for Pakistan in the Bangladesh Liberation War while Pakistan insisted that since Bangladesh was successor state of East Pakistan, the new nation had a responsibility to absorb the Bihari people just as West Pakistan had done with refugees flooding from the war, including Bengali people. As a result, the Bihari people became stateless.
Over 100,000 Bhutanese refugees, who have neither Bhutanese nor Nepalese citizenship, reside in Nepal.


=== Indonesia ===
In February 2020, the Indonesia government stated that any Indonesian national who ever joined the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) had automatically lost their Indonesian citizenship. Presidential Chief of Staff Moeldoko stated that the ISIL sympathizers "are stateless". Article 23 of Indonesian nationality law states that Indonesian nationals can lose their citizenship after, among other things, "joining a foreign military or taking an oath of allegiance to another country".


=== Japan ===
When Japan lost control over Korea in 1945, those Koreans who remained in Japan received Chōsen-seki, a designation of nationality that did not actually grant them citizenship. Roughly half of these people later received South Korean citizenship. The other half were affiliated with North Korea, which is unrecognized by Japan, and they are legally stateless. Practically speaking, they mostly hold North Korean citizenship (albeit meaningless in Japan, their country of residence) and may repatriate there, and under Japanese law, they are treated as foreign nationals and given the full privileges entitled to that class. In 2010, Chōsen-seki holders were banned from South Korea.
UNHCR published a study on statelessness in Japan in 2010.


=== Kuwait ===

Kuwait has the largest stateless population in the entire region. In 2024, Kuwait revoked the citizenship of 42,000 people in just six months. Most stateless Bedoon of Kuwait belong to the northern tribes, especially the Al-Muntafiq tribal confederation. A minority of stateless Bedoon in Kuwait belong to the 'Ajam community.
Under the terms of the Kuwait Nationality Law 15/1959, all the Bedoon in Kuwait are eligible for Kuwaiti nationality by naturalization. In practice, it is widely believed that Sunnis of Persian descent or tribal Saudis can readily achieve Kuwaiti naturalization whilst Bedoon of Iraqi tribal ancestry cannot. As a result, many Bedoon in Kuwait feel pressured to hide their background.
From 1965 until 1985, the Bedoon were treated as Kuwaiti citizens and guaranteed citizenship: they had free access to education, health care and all the other privileges of citizenship. The stateless Bedoon constituted 80-90% of the Kuwaiti Army in the 1970s and 1980s until the Gulf War.
In 1985 at the height of the Iran–Iraq War, the Bedoon were reclassified as "illegal residents" and denied Kuwaiti citizenship and its accompanying privileges. The Iran–Iraq War threatened Kuwait's internal stability and the authorities feared the sectarian background of the stateless Bedoon. The Bedoon issue in Kuwait "overlaps with historic sensitivities about Iraqi influence inside Kuwait", with many of those denied Kuwaiti nationality being believed to have originated from Iraq.
In 1985, the then emir, Jaber Al-Ahmad Al-Sabah, escaped an assassination attempt. After the assassination attempt, the government changed the Bedoon's status from that of legal residents to illegal residents. By 1986, the Bedoon were fully excluded from the same social and economic rights as Kuwaiti citizens.
Since 1986, the Kuwaiti government has refused to grant any form of documentation to the Bedoon, including birth certificates, death certificates, identity cards, marriage certificates, and driving licences. The Bedoon also face many restrictions in employment, travel and education. They are not permitted to educate their children in state schools and universities.
In 1995, Human Rights Watch reported that there were 300,000 stateless Bedoon, and this number was formally repeated by the British government.
According to several human rights organizations, the State of Kuwait is committing ethnic cleansing and genocide against the stateless Bedoon. The Kuwaiti Bedoon crisis resembles the Rohingya crisis in Myanmar. In 1995, it was reported in the British parliament that the Al Sabah ruling family had deported 150,000 stateless Bedoon to refugee camps in the Kuwaiti desert near the Iraqi border with minimal water, insufficient food and no basic shelter, and that they were threatened with death if they returned to their homes in Kuwait City. As a result, many of the stateless Bedoon fled to Iraq, where they remain stateless people even today. The Kuwaiti government also stands accused of attempting to falsify their nationalities in official state documents. There have been reports of forced disappearances and mass graves of Bedoon.
The 1995 Human Rights Watch report stated:

"The totality of the treatment of the Bedoons amounts to a policy of denationalization of native residents, relegating them to an apartheid-like existence in their own country. The Kuwaiti government policy of harassment and intimidation of the Bedoons and of denying them the right to lawful residence, employment, travel and movement, contravene basic principles of human rights. Denial of citizenship to the Bedoons clearly violates international law. Denying Bedoons the right to petition the courts to challenge governmental decisions regarding their claims to citizenship and lawful residence in the country violates the universal right to due process of law and equality before the law." 
British MP George Galloway stated:

"Of all the human rights atrocities committed by the ruling family in Kuwait, the worst and the greatest is that against the people known as the Bedoons. There are more than 300,000 Bedoons—one third of Kuwait's native population. Half of them—150,000—have been driven into refugee camps in the desert across the Iraqi border by the regime and left there to bake and to rot. The other 150,000 are treated not as second-class or even fifth-class citizens, but not as any sort of citizen. They are bereft of all rights. It is a scandal that almost no one in the world cares a thing about the plight of 300,000 people, 150,000 of them cast out of the land in which they have lived [when] many have lived in the Kuwaiti area for many centuries." 
By 2004, the Bedoon accounted for only 40% of the Kuwaiti Army, a major reduction from their presence in the 1970s and 1980s. In 2013, the UK government estimated that there were 110,729 "documented" Bedoon in Kuwait, without giving a total estimate, but noting that all stateless individuals in Kuwait remain at risk of persecution and human rights breaches. The Bedoon are generally categorized into three groups: stateless tribespeople, stateless police/military and the stateless children of Kuwaiti women who married Bedoon men. According to the Kuwaiti government, there are only 93,000 "documented" Bedoon in Kuwait. In 2018, the Kuwaiti government claimed that it would naturalize up to 4,000 stateless Bedoon per year but this is considered unlikely.
In recent years, the rate of suicide among Bedoon has risen sharply.


=== Myanmar ===

The Rohingya people are a minority group in Myanmar (formerly Burma). They are considered racially inferior by the Myanmar government, and are thus denied citizenship from birth. Instead, they are given identification cards which single them out and which do not grant them the rights of citizenship. This has created some 700,000 stateless persons, been a basis for the Rohingya genocide, and precipitated an international refugee crisis.


=== Pakistan ===
Inside Karachi city there is a stateless population of approximately 1.2 million Pakistani Bengalis.
As of January 2022, there were approximately 3 million Afghans living in Pakistan. Of those, around 1.4 million of them are Proof of Registration (PoR) cardholders, approximately 840,000 hold an Afghan Citizen Card (ACC), and an estimated 775,000 are undocumented.


=== Palestinians ===

Abbas Shiblak estimates that over half of the Palestinian people in the world are stateless.
Palestinians in Lebanon and those in Syria are constitutionally denied citizenship, and are thus stateless.
After Israel annexed East Jerusalem following the Six-Day War in 1967, Palestinians living there received, along with Israeli permanent residency status, the right to apply for citizenship. Shortly after the offer was made, it was rejected by Arab leaders. Between 1967 and 2007, only 12,000 of the 250,000 Palestinians living in Jerusalem have been granted Israeli citizenship. Since 2007, more have applied, although the majority still reject it. Those who do not have Israeli citizenship are generally stateless.
Many descendants of Palestinian refugees live permanently in countries of which they would be expected to be citizens, but they are not citizens because that country adheres to the policy of the Arab League in denying citizenship to Palestinians.
Even though Palestinians living in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip were issued Palestinian passports under the Oslo Accords and Palestinian legal statehood is somewhat widely acknowledged internationally as of 2018, some countries (such as the United States), recognize them as travel documents but do not recognize their citizenship. According to international law, only states can have nationals (meaning citizens), meaning that the remainder states who do not consider Palestine a state implements such policies and deem its holders as “stateless”.
A similar situation exists for Armenians in Israel and Palestine, where as of 2023, about 2,000 Armenians in Israeli-controlled territory were stateless.


=== Philippines ===
As of 2021, there are around 700 people of Japanese descent who are considered as stateless. Most of these people are descendants of Japanese fathers who settled in the Philippines in the early 20th century. Due to the outbreak of the World War II, many of these individuals separated from their fathers who either enlisted in the Imperial Japanese Army, repatriated to Japan or died during the war. After the war many of them settled in more remote areas of the Philippines and discarded proof of the Japanese nationality as a preventive measure against anti-Japanese retaliatory attacks due to atrocities committed by Japan during the war.


=== Puerto Rico ===

In 1994, Juan Mari Brás, a Puerto Rican lawyer and political historian, renounced his American citizenship before a consular agent in the United States Embassy of Venezuela. In December 1995, his loss of nationality was confirmed by the US Department of State. That same month, he requested that the Puerto Rico State Department furnish him with proof of his Puerto Rican citizenship. The request involved more than just a bureaucratic formality; Mari Brás tested the self-determination of Puerto Rico by trying to become the first Puerto Rican citizen who was not also an American citizen.
Mari Brás claimed that as a Puerto Rican national born and raised in Puerto Rico, he was clearly a Puerto Rican citizen and therefore had every right to continue to reside, work, and, most importantly, vote in Puerto Rico. The State Department responded promptly, claiming that Puerto Rican citizenship did not exist independent of American citizenship, and in 1998, the department rescinded its recognition of his renunciation of citizenship. The official response to Mari Brás stated that Puerto Rican citizenship existed only as an equivalent to residency. However, the Puerto Rico State Department issues certificates of citizenship to people born outside of Puerto Rico to a Puerto Rican parent, including some people who may have never resided in the territory.


=== Qatar ===
Most of Qatar's Bedoon are stateless tribesmen from the Ghufrani tribe. In 2005, Qatar stripped the citizenship of over 5,000 members of the tribe. After international outcry, it restored the citizenship of approximately 2,000. Today, there are between 1,200 and 1,500 Bedoon in Qatar.


=== Saudi Arabia ===
Dissidents and other people can have their citizenship revoked. Osama bin Laden was asked to hand in his passport in the 1990s.


=== Syria ===
By 2011, close to an estimated 300,000 stateless Kurds were in Syria. While the government's implementation of the 2011 Decree did reduce the number of stateless persons, a significant part of Syria's remaining statelessness problem has now been 'exported' to new geographic and legal contexts with the displacement of affected persons out of the country.


=== Thailand ===

The UNCHR estimates 574,200 stateless people born and living in Thailand in 2022, up from 443,862 in 2016. Mostly they are from hill tribes or are the children of illegal migrants, most of them from Myanmar. Stateless people in Thailand suffer serious disadvantages. Unlike Thai citizens, they cannot use government facilities where they must first show an ID card. They cannot go to a clinic or hospital for treatment of illness or injury. They cannot open a bank account. They cannot buy and use a smartphone, or own and drive a car, or buy property or a home. Some progress is being made, but "...these efforts are halfhearted and plagued with bureaucratic hurdles" according to the Bangkok Post. It gives as an example a new law, passed in 2008, that grants Thai citizenship to stateless people. But it applies only to those who were born before 26 February 1992, thus impacting the young most harshly. The good news is that stateless children can now attend state schools. Also, a new law allows stateless people to seek employment in professions not explicitly reserved for Thais. State hospitals now issue birth certificates to all children, a formality often neglected in the past. Importantly, the Thai military government has adopted the goal of "zero statelessness" by 2024. In 2024, the government planned pathways for stateless people to gain permanent residency and eventually citizenship for themselves and their Thai-born children.


=== Turkey ===

Following a failed coup in 2016, the Turkish government revoked about 50,000 passports. While most of the people whose passports were revoked were in Turkey at the time, one notable Turkish expatriate affected by this action was NBA player Enes Kanter. He is a vocal critic of Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan and a public supporter of the Gülen movement, which the government blamed for the coup attempt. Kanter's passport was canceled while he was attempting to travel to the U.S., and he was briefly detained in Romania before being allowed to continue his travel. Turkey issued an arrest warrant against Kanter in May 2017, claiming that he was a member of "an armed terrorist organization." The government's action effectively rendered Kanter stateless, and soon after this incident expressed a desire to seek U.S. citizenship. He then held a U.S. green card, which technically enabled him to travel to and from Canada for games in Toronto. However, in the 2018–19 season, Kanter did not travel with his team to games in London or Toronto because Turkey had requested an Interpol red notice against him. On November 29, 2021, he became a naturalized U.S. citizen, changing his name to Enes Kanter Freedom.


=== Ukraine ===

After the completion of his term, Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili moved to Ukraine where he was given citizenship and appointed Governor of Ukraine's Odesa Oblast. Due to Georgian restrictions on dual nationality, he was stripped of his Georgian citizenship.
While visiting the U.S. in 2017, Saakashvili's Ukrainian citizenship was revoked by Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko, leaving Saakashvili stateless. After the election of Volodymyr Zelensky in 2019, Saakashvili's Ukrainian citizenship was restored.


=== United Arab Emirates ===
In the United Arab Emirates some stateless people were granted citizenship after many years and even decades. Children of a foreign parent were also granted citizenship.


=== United Kingdom ===

Different classes in British nationality law have led to situations in which people were considered British subjects but not nationals, or in which people held a British passport without right of abode in the United Kingdom. Examples include British Protected Persons, who are considered British nationals. British nationals (irrespective of the class of nationality) who reside abroad but are not entitled to protection by the British government are de facto stateless.
Many situations that put people at risk of statelessness were resolved after April 30, 2003, when the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act of 2002 came into force. As a result of this act, the United Kingdom gave most people with residual British nationality but no other citizenship the right to register as full British citizens. However, there are still some people who have not been able or willing to register as citizens. Following the publication of a joint UNHCR-Asylum Aid report in 2011, the UK adopted a statelessness determination procedure in 2013.

In January 2014, the Immigration Bill 2013–14 was introduced to extend the powers of the Home Secretary to deprive a naturalised British citizen of their citizenship, even if that renders the individual stateless, if the Secretary of State is satisfied that the deprivation of citizenship is conducive to the public good because the person "has conducted him or herself in a manner which is seriously prejudicial to the vital interests of the UK." A naturalised British citizen is someone who was not born a British citizen but has become one through the legal process of naturalisation, by which someone with no automatic claim to British citizenship can obtain the same rights and privileges as someone who was born a British citizen. The bill was initially blocked by the House of Lords in April 2014. However, the Lords reconsidered their decision in May 2014, and the bill returned to the House of Commons before being set into UK law.


=== United States ===

The United States, which is not a signatory to the 1954 Convention on the Status of Stateless Persons or the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness, is one of the countries that allow their citizens to renounce their citizenship even if they do not hold any other. The Foreign Affairs Manual instructs State Department employees to make it clear to Americans who will become stateless after renunciation that they may face extreme difficulties (including deportation back to the United States) following their renunciation, but to afford such persons their right to give up citizenship. Former Americans who have voluntarily made themselves stateless include Garry Davis in the beginning years of the United Nations, Thomas Jolley during the Vietnam War, Joel Slater as a political protest in 1987 while believing that he would obtain Australian citizenship, and Mike Gogulski as a political protest in 2008 without attempting to take any other citizenship. The UNHCR published a report on statelessness in the United States in 2012 in which it recommended the establishment of a determination procedure that incorporates a definition of statelessness in accordance with international law to ensure that stateless persons are permitted to reside in the United States.
The Fourteenth Amendment of the US Constitution granted citizenship to African American slaves. The Supreme Court ruling in United States v. Wong Kim Ark clarified that people born to aliens on US soil were entitled to citizenship under the Fourteenth Amendment. However, it excluded Native Americans by defining a citizen as any person born in the US, but only if "subject to the jurisdiction thereof"; this latter clause excluded anyone who was born in tribal nations within the United States, as the Supreme Court ruled in the 1884 case of Elk v. Wilkins that they are "quasi-foreign nations who deal with Congress using treaties". The Indian Citizenship Act of 1924 addressed the issue by granting citizenship to America's indigenous peoples.
The Center for Migration Studies of New York estimated 218,000 stateless people were in the United States in 2017, based on the American Community Survey.


=== Uruguay ===
Uruguay has ratified both the 1954 Convention on the Status of Stateless Persons and the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness, and implemented law 19682 to meet these ratified commitments. It is also a signatory of the "Brazil Declaration" which commits countries in the South American region to end statelessness by January 1, 2024.
However the 1968 law provides for Uruguayan citizenship as one of the mechanisms to end statelessness.  While the process of naturalization to citizenship is similar to other ius domicilii regimes, it does not lead to Uruguayan nationality.  As a result, stateless residents will become stateless citizens, and also citizens of countries that do not allow for dual citizenship also become stateless citizens of Uruguay.  Uruguayan passports issued to this group of citizens highlights their status through "XXX" in the national field, meaning "unknown nationality".


== Organizations ==


=== United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees ===


==== Statelessness mandate ====
UNHCR's responsibilities were initially limited to stateless persons who were refugees, as set out in Paragraph 6(A)(II) of its statute and Article 1(A)(2) of the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees. They were expanded following the adoption of the 1954 Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons and the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness. General Assembly Resolutions 3274 (XXIV) and 31/36 designated UNHCR as the body responsible for examining the cases of persons who claimed the benefit of the 1961 convention and assisting such persons in presenting their claims to the appropriate national authorities. Subsequently, the United Nations General Assembly conferred upon UNHCR a global mandate for the identification, prevention, and reduction of statelessness and for the international protection of stateless persons. This mandate has continued to evolve as the General Assembly has endorsed the conclusions of the UNHCR Executive Committee, notably Executive Committee Conclusion No. 106 of 2006 on the "identification, prevention, and reduction of statelessness and protection of stateless persons".


==== Global campaign to end statelessness ====
The UNHCR launched a global campaign on November 4, 2014, to end statelessness within 10 years.
As part of the campaign, it published a special report providing a comprehensive overview of statelessness and delving into the human impact of the phenomenon. It also published an open letter addressed to states, urging them to take action. In addition to UNHCR High Commissioner António Guterres, the letter was signed by Angelina Jolie, a UNHCR special envoy; Surin Pitsuwan, former secretary-general of ASEAN; Shirin Ebadi, a Nobel Peace Prize laureate; Archbishop Emeritus Desmond Tutu; Barbara Hendricks, a UNHCR honorary lifetime goodwill ambassador; Madeleine Albright, former US secretary of state; Carla Del Ponte, former chief prosecutor of two UN international criminal tribunals; Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein and Louise Arbour, former UN high commissioners for human rights; and Dame Rosalyn Higgins, former president of the International Court of Justice, among others.
In addition, a "global action plan to end statelessness" was launched following consultation with states, civil society, and international organisations. It sets out a guiding framework of 10 actions that need to be taken to end statelessness by 2024.
The plan includes actions to:

resolve existing situations of statelessness;
prevent new cases of statelessness from emerging; and
better identify and protect stateless persons.
The 10 actions are:

Action 1: Resolve existing major situations of statelessness.
Action 2: Ensure that no child is born stateless.
Action 3: Remove gender discrimination from nationality laws.
Action 4: Prevent denial, loss, or deprivation of nationality on discriminatory grounds.
Action 5: Prevent statelessness in cases of state succession.
Action 6: Grant protection status to stateless migrants and facilitate their naturalisation.
Action 7: Ensure birth registration for the prevention of statelessness.
Action 8: Issue nationality documentation to those entitled to it.
Action 9: Accede to the UN statelessness conventions.
Action 10: Improve quantitative and qualitative data on stateless populations.


=== International Stateless Persons Organisation ===
In March 2012, the International Stateless Persons Organisation (ISPO), an international non-governmental organization, was founded by Dr. Fernando Macolor Cruz, a tribal prince and instructor of history and political science at Palawan State University in the Philippines. It aims to provide institutional representation to stateless persons throughout the world through a network of volunteer human rights law practitioners who act as country representatives.


=== Institute on Statelessness and Inclusion ===
The Institute on Statelessness and Inclusion (ISI), is the first and only civil society organisation dedicated to promoting the right to a nationality and the rights of stateless people globally. It works with partners around the world to promote everyone’s equal right to a nationality and the human rights of all stateless people, while supporting stateless people in their efforts to achieve meaningful change. ISI works to strengthen resilience, leadership, collaboration and resourcing of stateless-led initiatives and ensuring that those impacted by statelessness lead and are centred in efforts to address statelessness. It serves as incubator of the Global Movement Against Statelessness and as an active steering group member of the Global Statelessness Fund. ISI helps to connect and facilitate exchange between individuals and groups working on the issue, including as the convenor of regular learning programmes and the World Conferences on Statelessness. ISI also contributes towards strengthening the evidence base for action and facilitating information and knowledge-sharing, including by reporting on developments and opportunities in its Monthly Bulletin and curating the online knowledge platform StatelessHub. It plays a bridging role between different stakeholders – including by supporting civil society engagement with UN human rights mechanisms, as co-convenor of the world’s only dedicated journal on statelessness, the Statelessness and Citizenship Review, and by making connections with key actors working on intersecting issues. ISI is established as a Dutch foundation (‘stichting’) and has two offices: in Rotterdam and London.


=== European Network on Statelessness ===
The European Network on Statelessness, a civil society alliance, was set up to address the problem of 600,000 stateless persons in Europe and to act as a coordinating body and expert resource for organisations across Europe that work with or come into contact with stateless persons.


== See also ==
Alien (law)
Canvas ceiling
Certificate of identity
List of people who have lived at airports
The Man Without a Country
Multiple citizenship
Nansen passport
Nomad
Perpetual foreigner
Perpetual traveller
Refugee law
Stateless nation
The Terminal
Uncontacted peoples


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Bingham, Laura; Julia Harrington-Reddy and Sebastian Kohn, De Jure Statelessness in the Real World: Applying the Prato Summary Conclusions, 2011
Blitz, Brad K., and Maureen Lynch. "Statelessness and the Benefits of Citizenship: A Comparative Study Archived October 8, 2011, at the Wayback Machine."
Spotlight on a Hidden Problem: Statelessness—Fact Sheet, Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration, U.S. State Department
Unravelling Anomaly. Detention, Discrimination and the Protection Needs of the Stateless Persons. London: Equal Rights Trust, 2010. ISBN 978-0-9560717-3-6
Nationality and Statelessness: A Handbook for Parliamentarians. High Commissioner for Refugees, Inter-Parliamentary Union, 2005
Manby, Bronwen. Struggles for Citizenship in Africa, 2009
Milbrandt, Jay. Stateless, 2011
Open Society Foundations and Refugees International, Without Citizenship: Statelessness, Discrimination, and Repression in Kuwait Archived March 9, 2012, at the Wayback Machine, 2011
"Hundreds of Thousands of Stateless People Are Living in Legal Limbo in the U.S." PBS News Hour. PBS. April 5, 2022.
Shiblak, Abbas. "Stateless Palestinians"; Archived January 24, 2014, at the Wayback Machine
Siegelberg, Mira L. 2020. Statelessness: A Modern History. Harvard University Press.
Somers, Margaret. 2008. Genealogies of Citizenship: Markets, Statelessness, and the Right to Have Rights. Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-79394-0
Stateless: The World's Most Invisible People; Archived March 18, 2013, at the Wayback Machine. Reuters AlertNet, 2011
UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) 2012 The State of the World's Refugees: In Search of Solidarity.


== External links ==

International law: treaties and case law
Full Convention text of 1961 Convention
Map showing State Parties to the Statelessness Conventions
Council of Europe Convention on Reduction of Statelessness in Relation to State Succession
UN Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons Archived December 27, 2012, at the Wayback Machine (full text)
International case law on statelessness
dhakatribune The stateless bangalis of karachi
Intergovernmental organizations:
UNHCR page on prevention and reduction of statelessness and protection of stateless persons – background information, tools and news From UNHCR website
Refworld's special feature page on Statelessness
UNHCR's #IBELONG campaign microsite
International NGOs
Statelessness Archived January 16, 2012, at the Wayback Machine on the website of the Open Society Foundations
Statelessness on the website of Refugees International
Website of the International Observatory on Statelessness a clearinghouse for NGOs, academics, advocacy groups and policy-makers working on issues of statelessness
Website of the Institute on Statelessness and Inclusion
Website of the European Network on Statelessness
Academic Institutions
Website of the Statelessness Programme, an initiative of Tilburg Law School (Netherlands) dedicated to research, training and outreach on statelessness and related issues Archived May 22, 2017, at the Wayback Machine
Specific states
British nationality – provisions for reducing statelessness Archived May 2, 2006, at the Wayback Machine
United States IRS Form 8898 (Renouncing citizenship).
Documentary Film on Stateless person
Man without a nation-documentary film.
The South Florida Detention Facility, nicknamed Alligator Alcatraz, is an immigration detention facility located at Dade-Collier Training and Transition Airport inside Big Cypress National Preserve in Ochopee, Florida, United States. Controversy continues related to possible federal funding for this first state-run facility  within the context of immigration to the United States.
Federal instances, including Homeland Security, and the state government, represented by attorney general of Florida, James Uthmeier and the governor of Florida, Ron DeSantis  closely partnered on this facility as early as June 2025. In early August 2025, the Federal Emergency Management Agency confirmed reception of a grant application from state officials, later evaluated as a US$1.49 billion grant. In August 15, federal officials provided the Florida Division of Emergency Management (FDEM) with instructions related to the use of only US$608 million funds. The facility has faced lawsuits filed by environmental groups, civil liberties groups, and the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians; additionally, its legality has been questioned by a coalition of 67 members of Congress, led by Jeff Merkley and Debbie Wasserman Schultz. 
Criticism generally focus on inhumane conditions faced by its detainees, its environmental impact,, the protection of ancestral lands, and funding. In August 2025, U.S. district judge Kathleen Williams granted a preliminary injunction halting construction and prohibiting the government from transferring any additional detainees to the site, which was later stayed by the Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit allowing continued operations. In December 2025, the report "Torture and Enforced Disappearances in the Sunshine State: Human Rights Violations at 'Alligator Alcatraz' and Krome in Florida" published by Amnesty International concluded that the camp's conditions, including routine and prolonged use of shackles and retention in a "box" described as a 2x2 foot cage-like structure "constitutes torture". Human rights organizations and legal experts claim the camp does not meet the minimum standards of human treatment required for persons detained under international law due to the declared absence of sanitary facilities, medical care and access to legal advice with potential violations of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and the United Nations Convention Against Torture (UNCAT).


== Location ==
Located in the Everglades, the Big Cypress area was proposed to become the site of a new Miami Jetport and construction began in 1968 as Everglades Jetport. In 1969, Marjory Stoneman Douglas, author of The Everglades: River of Grass, founded Friends of the Everglades. Construction was halted in 1970 due to efforts of Native Americans including Buffalo Tiger, hunters, environmental concerns related to the Big Cypress Swamp and the cancellation of the 2707 Boeing program. By that point only one 10,500-foot (3,200 m) runway was built, the facility occupying 39 square miles (100 km2).
Following continued efforts to federally protect the area, Big Cypress National Preserve became one of the first National preserves in the United States National Park System on October 11, 1974. The Big Cypress National Preserve provides the Miccosukee, Seminole and Traditional people with permanent rights to occupy and use the land in traditional ways. In addition, they have first rights to develop income-producing businesses related to the resources and use of the preserve, such as guided tours.

State officials have argued that the facility's location and its susceptibility to hurricanes will encourage undocumented immigrants to self-deport.
Big Cypress National Preserve was designated a DarkSky International park in 2016; the nation's first preserve to achieve "dark sky" status.


== History ==


=== Background ===
During his second and current tenure, President Donald Trump and his administration have pursued a deportation policy characterized as "hardline"  and "maximalist". Trump has called for "huge camps" where migrants would be held in internment camps prior to deportation. On May 31, 2025, the Supreme Court approved the end of migrants' humanitarian legal status as part of mass deportation, but also highlighted the U.S. Constitution's guarantee of due process. Federal funding for the policy was voted by the U.S. Senate budget reconciliation bill on July 1, 2025, which includes $45 billion for immigration detention centers, a 265% increase to ICE's annual detention budget.
DeSantis invoked a standing 2023 immigration "state of emergency" to seize the county-owned airfield and fast-track construction without the usual environmental reviews or the traditional collaboration with local officials. Both Democratic Party and Republican legislators have questioned the use and overreach of emergency powers. Demographers from Florida State University found that the number of immigrants without legal status in Florida has declined since 2018, concluding "that policies that discourage new arrivals or encourage — or force — migrants to leave could jeopardize Florida's robust economy and the well-being of its population."


=== Naming ===
On June 19, 2025, Uthmeier publicly announced the detention center calling it "Alligator Alcatraz." Official sources stated that the official name is the "South Florida Detention Facility". Officials, including Florida Attorney General, and signs outside the camp announce "Alligator Alcatraz" as the name of the facility. The Tampa Bay Times and The Palm Beach Post described the speed of the construction as causing confusion on whether it was an official name or simply a branding effort.


=== Political responses ===
On June 23, 2025, Miami-Dade County Mayor Daniella Levine Cava wrote to the Florida Division and stated, "With the federal and state government investing well over $10 billion since 2019 in Everglades restoration and protection, we would appreciate a detailed analysis and report on environmental impacts of this facility to the Everglades."
U.S. President Donald Trump and then Secretary of Homeland Security Kristi Noem joined DeSantis and other Florida state leaders on July 1, 2025 for the opening. Trump praised it, saying, "It might be as good as the real Alcatraz," adding it's "a little controversial, but I couldn't care less."
After the facility's announcement, the Republican Party of Florida began to market "Alligator Alcatraz" merchandise, including hats, shirts, and koozies with AI-generated images, while the state of Florida also handed out "official Alligator Alcatraz merch" to conservative influencers.  Critics found the fundraising pitch cruel and inaccurate as hundreds of people being held there are not facing any criminal charges and the facility could be described as a concentration camp.
On July 2, Janelle Bynum, Maxwell Alejandro Frost and 22 other members of Congress wrote to Noem deploring that "detainees will be kept in tents with inadequate sanitation facilities and will face unbearable living conditions," including "exposure to deadly pathogens, constant threats from unpredictable flooding and extreme weather events, and daily temperatures averaging 90 degrees, with a heat index often over 100 degrees Fahrenheit."
In July, Florida Representative Anna Eskamani and State Senator Shevrin Jones joined lawmakers in suing DeSantis in order to gain access to the site. After their visit, they deplored the sanitary conditions, with Eskamani stating that the detention camp is "a political stunt with environmental damage and everyday lives being harmed. It needs to close immediately."
In February 2026, Florida House Republicans, led by Griff Griffits of Panama City Beach, introduced a bill, supported by Democrates, that would prohibit the use of Florida emergency funding for the camp, reserving the funds for "natural disasters only”.


=== Construction and operational costs ===
Documents requested by Second Judicial Circuit Judge Angela Dempsey  in March 2026 show Florida has spent more than $1 million per day to run the camp, with a “daily burn” rate of $3 million a day during its earliest weeks. The Federal Government had promised to reimburse the state of Florida US$608 million in expenses Florida officials initially announced a cost of US$450 million a year to operate at $245 a day per bed, more than the average estimated daily cost of detention of $187 for ICE. 
A team of private companies built the facility and the Florida National Guard deployed to secure the site. The Florida Division of Emergency Management and the governor's office bypassed procurement and competitive bidding rules and selected IRG Global Emergency Management, who had given $10,000 to Florida's Republican Party on June 24, 2025, for a $1.1 million contract for "operational support services in support of migration efforts in the State," followed by two more contracts with Florida, totaling over $5 million, for site shuttles, armory systems, on-site emergency services and air operations at the Ochopee site. IRG is an offshoot of Access Restoration Services US, Inc., a major campaign donor to DeSantis and totaling nearly $400,000 in donations to Republican coffers.
As of August 29, 2025, the State of Florida had incurred $218 million of sunk costs for the construction of the facility.


=== Detainees and reports of inhumane treatment ===
The first group of immigrant detainees arrived on July 3, 2025, beginning the facility's operations. A review of official records revealed that people detained at the facility included Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals recipients. Director Kerner testified that "detainees were there solely on immigration violations, none on state criminal charges."
Some detainees have reported harsh conditions at the facility, citing limited access to water, insufficient food, and restrictions on the practice of their religion. Detainees have described unsanitary conditions, including wastewater overflows and insect infestations, as well as inadequate access to medical care. The area on which the facility is located is also subject to frequent bouts of extreme weather, including yearly hurricanes, heavy rainfall, and high heat.
On July 12, Congressional and state lawmakers on-site reportedly heard cries of libertad, meaning "freedom" in Spanish, from detainees. Representative Debbie Wasserman Schultz described the detainees as "essentially packed into cages, wall-to-wall humans, 32 detainees per cage". Lawmakers were not permitted to view the entire facility.
According to a list of the population obtained by the Tampa Bay Times and Miami Herald in mid-July, more than 95% of the detainees held at the site originated from Latin American countries. Approximately 20% of the population are Guatemalan citizens, ~20% Mexican citizens, and another ~10% Cuban citizens.
On July 21, The Guardian described the facility as being at the center of "a succession of alleged abuses at jails operated by Immigration and Customs Enforcement Agency (ICE) in the state since January, chronicled by the advocacy groups Human Rights Watch, Americans for Immigrant Justice, and Sanctuary of the South from interviews with detainees". A month later, the outlet described reports of inhumane treatment and brutality at the camp as being commonplace.
On July 22, people detained on site began a hunger strike to protest what they consider to be inhumane and dangerous living conditions. Some detainees reported maggots in the food and having to "dig the fecal matter out of the toilets with their bare hands" for lack of plumbing. The Florida Division of Emergency Management has denied the claims, but no independent inspections have been allowed.
On August 29, three detainees said an uprising occurred at the facility in phone calls to Miami's Spanish language news channel Noticias 23. The incident allegedly occurred after several detainees shouted "freedom" after one received news a relative had died. The detainees described guards as indiscriminately beating detainees with batons and firing tear gas. The Florida Division of Emergency Management denied reports that the events had occurred.
The Miami Herald, as well as detainees' family and lawyers, reported that the whereabouts of about two-thirds of over 1,800 detainees held at the facility in July could not be determined. The New York Times reported that non-citizens from Cuba have been detained at the camp and deported at record numbers, including those seeking the right of asylum. 


== Legal challenges ==


=== Native American tribal rights ===
Miccosukee Tribe Chairman Talbert Cypress testified in a recent lawsuit that this is not the first time the tribe has had to fight for its land and rights, affirming, "we will always stand up for our culture, our sovereignty, and for the Everglades" There are 15 remaining traditional Miccosukee and Seminole villages, recognised as Indigenous people of the Everglades region, in Big Cypress, as well as ceremonial and burial grounds and other gathering sites, Cypress testified before Congress in 2024.
"We live here. Our ancestors fought and died here. They are buried here," he said. "The Big Cypress is part of us, and we are a part of it." The Seminole Tribe of Florida was likewise in opposition citing sacred lands.


=== Environmental challenge and injunction ===
In June 2025, Betty Osceola, a Miccosukee tribal judge and member of the Everglades Advisory Committee, organized Indigenous-led prayer gatherings and public demonstrations to highlight environmental and cultural concerns. Talbert Cypress, chairman of the Miccosukee Business Council, noted that no environmental impact research had been done and that some Native villages were within 900 feet (270 m) of the camp's entrance.
On June 27, 2025, a coalition led by Friends of the Everglades, the Center for Biological Diversity, and the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians, represented by Earthjustice and attorney Paul Schwiep, filed suit in a federal court seeking an injunction until a full environmental review and public-comment period are completed. Plaintiffs argue that the project threatens the habitat of endangered species, including that of the Florida panther and the Florida bonneted bat, and violates both the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and tribal cultural-resource protections.
On August 7, 2025, U.S. District Judge Kathleen Williams temporarily halted construction at the facility for two weeks, while she considered if the detention center violates environmental laws. Witnesses testified that 20 acres (8 hectares) of new asphalt had been laid, while temporary tents, trailers, and other heavy equipment were at the airport. Located in tropical wetlands, its  infrastructure and sewage may be sources of both water pollution and light pollution.
Judge Williams later granted a preliminary injunction on August 21 that prohibits the government from transferring any additional detainees to the site or performing any more construction work. She also ordered the Trump administration to remove temporary fencing, industrial lighting, generators, sewage and waste receptacles from the site within 60 days. Uthmeier stated that they plan to keep the ICE facility running, despite the court order.
The U.S. Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit, in a 2–1 decision early September, first stayed the injunction pending appeal, stating that because the federal government had yet to reimburse Florida's costs, federal law (the NEPA, which requires an environmental impact study) did not apply. The State's request for federal reimbursement had been submitted on August 7, 2025, which it did not inform the courts of. The Appellate Court granted a second stay, citing the government shutdown. On August 14, Friends of the Everglades filed suit to access Florida's undisclosed records of government financing for the camp under the Government in the Sunshine Act.
In March 2026, a state-commissioned environmental assessment report raised concerns about emissions of air pollutants exceeding regulatory thresholds, including carbon monoxide and particulate matter from vehicle use and continuously running generators.


=== Civil liberties challenges ===
On July 16, 2025, the American Civil Liberties Union, the ACLU of Florida, and Americans for Immigrant Justice filed a class action suit claiming the Trump administration violates the First Amendment and Fifth Amendment rights of people being detained, as well as the First Amendment rights of legal service organizations and law firms with clients held at the facility. The civil rights groups' lawsuit alleges detainees are being held without charges and are not being given access to their attorneys. As part of this lawsuit that also contests the federal cancellation of bond hearings, U.S. District Judge Rodolfo Ruiz has requested all written agreements and contracts showing who has legal custody of the hundreds of detainees.
Immigration attorneys described the facility's alternate system as a place "where the normal rules don't apply." Gov. Ron DeSantis falsely stated on July 25 that "Everybody here is already on a final removal order," a lie repeated by his director of emergency management, Kevin Guthrie. Internal data show that the vast majority of detainees did not have final orders of removal from a judge before entering the facility (nearly 70% did not), but they may have been deported as the facility's population fell to below 400 late August.
In January 2026, a former detainee from the camp deported to Colombia and a second who had requested asylum was deported to Haiti both testified before a District judge that the camp agents did not respect their right to legal counsel guaranteed by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution.


== Public response ==
Critics compare the facility to Nazi concentration camps, referring to it as "Alligator Auschwitz" while others situate it within American concentration camps, including the internment of German Americans, the internment of Italian Americans, and the internment of Japanese Americans at Manzanar and elsewhere. Members of the Republican Party, including DeSantis, have defended the facility, arguing it will help the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) to cope with the deportation policy of the federal government. The camp has been labeled a "black hole" following the irregular disappearance of detainees. Alex Padilla, Dick Durbin and other Democratic U.S. Senators mentioned the camp in their open letter about the increase in deaths during ICE detention.
At a weekly vigil at the camp entrance on September 21, Amy Fischer, Director of Refugee and Migrant Rights at Amnesty International USA, called the facility "a human rights disaster." Amnesty International launched a campaign to shut down the site on July 23 in response to unsanitary conditions, lack of medical care, and minimal access to lawyers, considering that it "sets a dangerous precedent for how states can partner with the federal government to expand the reach of its mass detention and deportation machine." "Amnesty International considers that detention conditions at both facilities amount to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment. The use of prolonged solitary confinement at Krome and the use of the 'box' at "Alligator Alcatraz" amount to torture or other ill-treatment."


=== Public opinion ===
Polling on July 4, 2025, by YouGov found that 48% of Americans polled opposed the detention center, with 33% supporting it and 18% unsure, while 53% of independents polled opposed the facility. In their poll on July 20, 28% of women and 42% of men approved the camp. A poll among Florida voters from July 25 to 27 found that 34% of Floridians held a favorable opinion and 59% saying they disapprove of using the state of Florida's taxpayer-funded Emergency Preparedness and Response Fund to cover costs.


== See also ==
Immigration detention in the United States


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Friends of the Everglades, Inc. v. Noem (US District Court for the Southern District of Florida), 1:25-cv-22896.
The Placitum of Riziano (Italian: Placito del Risano; Slovene: Rižanski zbor) was a dispute that took place c. 804 around the Rizano River, probably at Rižana in modern Slovenia. The document is important for the history of Koper and Trieste because it is the first written evidence of the presence of a Slavic-speaking population in Istria close to Trieste.
Legates sent by Charlemagne heard complaints by the leaders of Istria about the bishops and the John, Duke of Istria. The document is believed to have been recorded on the orders of Fortunatus II, patriarch of Grado. A point of historiographical contention is the fact that only the leaders of the coastal towns of Istria were present; one explanation for this is that the issues being discussed (for example, the abolition of the right of the townspeople to fish) only affected the coast.
The Latin text has been edited many times, but the standard edition is by Manaresi. The text has been translated into various modern languages.


== References ==


== Further reading ==
F. Borri, "Neighbours and Relatives: The Plea of Rizana as a Source for Northern Adriatic Elites," Mediterranean Studies 17 (2008), 1–26
T. S. Brown, Officers and Gentlemen and Officers: Imperial Administration and Aristocratic Power in Byzantine Italy, A.D. 554–800 (London, 1984)
J. Davis, Charlemagne's Practice of Empire (Cambridge, 2015), pp. 102–104, 274–277
M. Innes, "Framing the Carolingian Economy," Journal of Agrarian Change 9 (2009), 42–58..
The admission to legal practice in Spain is the legal prerequisites that must be followed in Spain for the admission to practice law, for receiving a license to practice law.
In Spain, in order for lawyers to practice law they must be in possession of the Lawyer's Professional Title (lawyer's license) and they must be joined to a bar association of Spain (any of the 83 bar associations of Spain). In Spain it is compulsory (legally mandatory) to be joined to a bar association (it could be any of all Spain). In total there are 6 years of training in order to practice law.
In order to practice law (and to get the lawyer's license), the following requirements are necessary (legally mandatory): a bachelor's degree in law (4 years), a master's degree in Law and Legal Practice (2 years), a legal internship (6 months, within those two years) and passing the All Spain Bar Examination (convened annually by the Government of Spain). Once the bar examination has been passed, the Minister of Justice issues the Lawyer's Professional Title (lawyer's license). Finally, with the lawyer's title, one can join any bar association and practice law.
In Spain, in total there are 6 years of training in order to practice law. The current system was created by the Law 34/2006 and the Royal Decree 775/2011, of 3 June. The first time the All Spain Bar Examination was convened (the new system) was in 2014 by virtue of the Royal Decree 150/2014, of March 7.
The current system had a gradual implementation (from 2006 to 2014). In 2006 the Law that established the new access was approved, in 2011 the complementary application regulations were approved and finally in 2014 it was fully implemented with additional rules of execution.


== Background ==
Until 2011, a person could gain access to the legal profession and become a lawyer just with the Licenciate Degree in Law (Licenciatura en Derecho), not to be confused with the current bachelor's degree (Bolonia). It was possible for new graduates to just join any Bar Association and practice law.
This situation however, involved an imbalance in the system of accessing the legal profession between countries because there were countries where you could practice law directly with only a law degree (Spain), while in others, a postgraduate degree was required, and in others, a postgraduate degree and state examination. This imbalanced situation brought many foreign citizens, in whose countries postgraduate and state examination was required, to Spain and through this legal loophole they acceded to legal practice without postgraduate or state examination.
However, with the entry into the European Union, which sought political and economic integration, the Bologna Process arrived and unified ways of accessing legal practice in European countries. To this we must also add the complaints of the legal profession in Spain (many lawyers put pressure on the government). For all this, the access system was changed.
The EU's Directive 2005/36/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 7 September 2005 on the recognition of professional qualifications aimed to unite all legal practice systems.


== Current system ==
Spain reformed the accessing the legal profession with the Law 34/2006, of 30 October, on Admission to legal practice. Later to apply and develop this Law, the Government of Spain passed the Royal Decree 775/2011, of 3 June, which approves the application regulations for the Law 34/2006.
In 2014 the Government of Spain passed the Royal Decree 150/2014, of March 7, which approves the additional rules of execution and application of the Law 34/2006.
In order to obtain the Lawyer's Professional Title, it is now necessary to have the following (in total, six years):

Bachelor's Degree in Law
Master's Degree in Legal Practice
Legal Internship
Bar Examination
Those six years of training are basic training to be a lawyer. After that, lawyers who want to specialize in a certain law must take an LLM (civil, commercial, criminal...).


== Bachelor's degree in Law ==
The Bachelor's Degree in Law (in Spain) is the academic degree conferred on those who have successfully completed a law study process at a university or institution of higher studies. Not to be confused with the (old) licenciate degree in law.
It is important to differentiate between two types of degrees in law (licenciate/bachelor's): the one previous to the Bologna Process and the later one. The one previous to the Bologna Process (licenciate degree in law) was composed of 5 years (it itself included the specialization and there was no legal internship). The current one consists of 4 years (bachelor's degree).


== Master's degree in Legal Practice ==
The master's degree in Legal Practice is a postgraduate academic degree, pursued by those holding a bachelor's degree in Law and it is the basic professional degree for admission into legal practice. It is a type or a subclass of a Master of Laws, but they should not be confused, they are not the same. This is a compulsory master's degree for admission to legal practice. It is not for specialization, it is for becoming a lawyer. After that, lawyers who want to specialize must take an LLM.
In Spain this master has different names according to the university that offers it, including: Master's Degree in Access to the Legal Profession, Master's Degree in Access to Law, Master's Degree in Legal Practice, Master's Degree in Advocacy... It does not have a unified official name, but the content is the same. For example, Garrigues (law firm) together with University of Nebrija offers it and it is called "Master's Degree in Legal Practice".
The master's degree in legal practice is made up of one or two years depending on the university that offers it and consists of 90 ECTS credits.
This master's degree it is not for specialization, it is for becoming a lawyer and for that reason sometimes it is offered together with a LLM, in a double máster's degree program (master's degree in legal practice + LLM of specialization).


== Legal internship ==
As to the legal internship, according to article 17 of the Royal Decree 775/2011, of 3 June, which approves the rules set by the LAC, it will involve a minimum of  30 ECTS credits, which means a minimum of 750 hours (6 months).


== Bar Examination ==
The (general) Bar Examination is a State compulsory examination for the entire national territory (unified exam). It is convened annually and administered by the Government of Spain.
According to article 17 of the Royal Decree 775/2011, of 3 June, the exam is written and consists of two parts that are done on the same day. The first exercise consists of an objective test of multiple answers and the second exercise of the evaluation will consist of solving a practical case previously chosen by the applicant among several alternatives.
The evaluation test has a total duration of 4 hours and consists of:

50 questions on «Common subjects in the practice of the legal profession».
25 questions on «Specific subjects» according to the legal specialty (civil and commercial, criminal, administrative and labor)
In addition, the questionnaire includes six reservation questions for the section «Common subjects exercising the legal profession» and two for each legal specialty of the section «Specific subjects».
The result of the State Test is pass or fail.


== Lawyer's Professional Title ==
The Lawyer's Professional Title is the professional license in Spain to practice law, which allows legal practice in Spain and the EU. It was created in 2006 by the Law 34/2006. Until this law came into force, the "title" or "license" of Lawyer did not exist as such in Spain.
Once you have passed the State Examination for Access to the Legal Profession, the Ministry of Justice of the Spanish Government gives you the Lawyer's Professional Title and with it you can join a Bar Association and practice law.

Article 1. Object and purpose of the law.
1. Esta ley tiene por objeto regular las condiciones de obtención del título profesional de abogado y el título profesional de procurador de los tribunales, como colaboradores en el ejercicio del derecho fundamental a la tutela judicial efectiva, con el fin de garantizar el acceso de los ciudadanos a un asesoramiento, defensa jurídica y representación técnica de calidad.
2. La obtención del título profesional de abogado en la forma determinada por esta ley es necesaria para el desempeño de la asistencia letrada en aquellos procesos judiciales y extrajudiciales en los que la normativa vigente imponga o faculte la intervención de abogado, y, en todo caso, para prestar asistencia letrada o asesoramiento en Derecho utilizando la denominación de abogado; todo ello sin perjuicio del cumplimiento de cualesquiera otros requisitos exigidos por la normativa vigente para el ejercicio de la abogacía.

4. La obtención de los títulos profesionales de abogado o procurador será requisito imprescindible para la colegiación en los correspondientes colegios profesionales.
In this way, the aforementioned Law created this professional title that before 2006 did not exist in Spain as such, and it established that it is the basic requirement to be able to join a Bar Association and practice law.


== Joining a Bar Association ==
In Spain it is mandatory to join a Bar Association to practice law and the requirement to join a Bar Association is to be in possession of the Lawyer's Professional Title.
The incorporation into a single Bar Association is sufficient to practice throughout the national territory, being that Bar Association the sole professional domicile or principal domicile of the lawyer.


== Legal framework ==
Law 34/2006, of 30 October, on Admission to legal practice
Royal Decree 775/2011, of 3 June, which approves the application regulations for the Law 34/2006
Royal Decree 150/2014, of March 7, which approves the additional rules of execution and application of the Law 34/2006
Resolution of September 7, 2012, of the General Directorate of Justice, by which the Bar Examination is summoned for admission to legal practice in Spain


== References ==.
A law school in the United States is an educational institution where students obtain a professional education in law after first obtaining an undergraduate degree.
Law schools in the U.S. confer the degree of Juris Doctor (J.D.), which is a professional doctorate. It is the degree usually required to practice law in the United States, and the final degree obtained by most practitioners in the field. Juris Doctor programs at law schools are usually three-year programs if done full-time, or four-year programs if done via evening classes. Some U.S. law schools include an Accelerated JD program.
Other degrees that are awarded include the Master of Laws (LL.M.) and the Doctor of Juridical Science (J.S.D. or S.J.D.) degrees, which can be more international in scope. Most law schools are colleges, schools or other units within a larger post-secondary institution, such as a university. Legal education is very different in the United States than in many other parts of the world.


== Terminology ==
A 2006 study found that the names of the 192 law schools approved by the American Bar Association (ABA) at that time included one of five generic identifiers: "school of law" (118), "college of law" (38), "law school" (28), "law center" (7), and "faculty of law" (1).  However, in ordinary speech, "law school" is universally preferred for its "brevity and clarity".


== Admission ==
In the United States, law schools require a bachelor's degree in any discipline, a satisfactory undergraduate grade point average (GPA), and a satisfactory score on the Law School Admission Test (LSAT) as prerequisites for admission. Some states that have non-ABA-approved schools or state-accredited schools have equivalency requirements that usually equal 90 credits toward a bachelor's degree. 
Globally, the requirement of a bachelor's degree is one of the most distinctive features of the American law school. Elsewhere, it is routine to award law degrees to undergraduates. In contrast, a typical American lawyer must first complete seven years of postsecondary education before they become eligible for a license to practice law. Another significant distinction is that, unlike many other countries where law professors usually hold research doctorates, most American law professors have earned only the same J.D. degree which will be awarded to the students they are teaching.
Though undergraduate GPA and LSAT score are the most important factors considered by law school admissions committees, individual factors are also somewhat important. Personal factors are evaluated through essays, short-answer questions, letters of recommendation, and other application materials. The standards for grades and LSAT scores vary by school. Interviews—either in person or via video chat—may be optional, or invitational, application components. Many law schools actively seek applicants from outside the traditional pool to boost racial, economic, and experiential diversity on campus. Most law schools now factor in extracurricular activities, work experience, and unique courses of study in their evaluation of applicants. A growing number of law school applicants have several years of work experience, and correspondingly fewer law students enter immediately after completing their undergraduate education. However, law schools generally only consider undergraduate and not post-collegiate transcripts when considering an applicant for admission;  the former are considered by law schools to be a more uniform standard than the latter for judging academic performance.
Many law schools offer substantial scholarships and grants to many of their students, dramatically reducing the actual cost of attending law school compared to listed tuition prices. Some law schools condition scholarships on maintaining a certain GPA.
As of 2013, there were 128,641 students enrolled in JD programs at the 204 approved ABA law schools. A decade later, in 2023, J.D. programs enrolled 116,897 students at the 196 institutions then approved by the ABA. Since 2016, women enrolled in American law schools have outnumbered men. In 2024, 56.09 percent of JD students enrolled at ABA-accredited schools were women.


== Accreditation ==

To sit for the bar exam, the vast majority of state bar associations require accreditation of an applicant's law school by the American Bar Association. The ABA has promulgated detailed requirements covering every aspect of a law school, down to the precise contents of the law library and the minimum number of minutes of instruction required to receive a J.D. As of 2020, there were 203 ABA-accredited law schools that awarded the J.D., divided between 202 with full accreditation and one with provisional accreditation. The Judge Advocate General's Legal Center and School in Charlottesville, Virginia, a school operated by the United States Army that conducts a post-J.D. program for military attorneys, is also ABA-accredited.
Non-ABA approved law schools have much lower bar passage rates than ABA-approved law schools, and do not submit or disclose employment outcome data to the ABA.
In addition, individual state legislatures or bar examiners may maintain a separate approval system, which is open to non-ABA accredited schools. If that is the case, graduates of these schools may generally sit for the bar exam only in the state in which their school is accredited. California is the most famous example of state-specific approval. The State Bar of California's Committee of Bar Examiners approves many schools that may not qualify for or request ABA accreditation. Graduates of such schools can sit for the bar exam in California, and once they have passed that exam, a large number of states allow those students to sit for their bars (after practicing for a certain number of years in California).
California is also the first state to allow graduates of distance legal education (online and correspondence) to take its bar exam. However, online and correspondence law schools are generally not accredited by the ABA or approved by state bar examiners, and the eligibility of their graduates to sit for the bar exam may vary from state to state. Even in California, for instance, the State Bar deems certain online schools as "registered", meaning their graduates may take the bar exam, but also specifically says the "Committee of Bar Examiners does not approve nor accredit correspondence schools." Kentucky goes further by specifically disqualifying correspondence school graduates from admission to the bar. This applies even if the graduate has gained admission in another jurisdiction.


== Curriculum ==

Law students are referred to as 1Ls, 2Ls, and 3Ls based on their year of study. In the United States, the American Bar Association does not mandate a particular curriculum for 1Ls. ABA Standard 302(a)(1) requires only the study of "substantive law" that will lead to "effective and responsible participation in the legal profession." However, most law schools have their own mandatory curriculum for 1Ls, which typically includes:

Civil procedure (Federal Rules of Civil Procedure)
Constitutional law (United States Constitution, especially Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments, and the Commerce Clause)
Contracts (Article 2 (Sales) of the Uniform Commercial Code and Restatement (Second) of Contracts)
Criminal law (General common law, Model Penal Code, and state criminal statutes)
Property (General common law and Restatement of Property)
Torts (General common law, Restatement (Second) and Restatement (Third) of Torts)
Legal research (Use of a law library and computer-assisted legal research, including both LexisNexis and Westlaw)
Legal writing (including objective analysis, persuasive analysis, and legal citation)
These basic courses are intended to provide an overview of the broad study of law. Not all ABA-approved law schools offer all of these courses in the 1L year; for example, many schools do not offer constitutional law and/or criminal law until the second and third years. Most schools also require Evidence but rarely offer the course to first-year students. Some schools combine legal research and legal writing into a single year-long "lawyering skills" course, which may also include a small oral argument component.
Because the first year curriculum is always fixed, most schools do not allow 1L students to select their own course schedules, and instead hand them their schedules at new student orientation.
At most schools, the grade for an entire course depends upon the outcome of only one or two examinations, usually in essay form, which are administered via students' laptop computers in the classroom with the assistance of specialized software. Some professors may use multiple choice exams in part or in full if the course material is suitable for it (e.g., professional responsibility). Legal research and writing courses tend to have several major projects (some graded, some not) and a final exam in essay form. Most schools impose a mandatory grade curve (see below).
After the first year, law students are generally free to pursue different fields of legal study.  All law schools offer (or try to offer) a broad array of upper-division courses in areas of substantive law like administrative law, corporate law, international law, admiralty law, intellectual property law, and tax law, and in areas of procedural law not normally covered in the first year, like criminal procedure and remedies.  Many law schools also offer upper-division practical training courses in client counseling, trial advocacy, appellate advocacy, and alternative dispute resolution. Depending upon the law school, practical training courses may involve fictional exercises in which students interact with each other or with volunteer actors playing clients, witnesses, and judges, or real-world cases at legal clinics.
Graduation is the assured outcome for the majority of students who pay their tuition on time, behave honorably and responsibly, maintain a minimum per-semester unit count and grade point average, take required upper-division courses, and successfully complete a certain number of units by the end of their sixth semester.
The ABA also requires that all students at ABA-approved schools take an ethics course in professional responsibility. Typically, this is an upper-level course; most students take it in the 2L year. This requirement was added after the Watergate scandal, which seriously damaged the public image of the profession because President Richard Nixon and most of his alleged co-conspirators were lawyers. The ABA desired to demonstrate that the legal profession could regulate itself, wished to reassert and maintain its position of leadership, and hoped to prevent direct federal regulation of the profession.
As of 2004, to ensure that students' research and writing skills do not deteriorate, the ABA has added an upper division writing requirement. Law students must take at least one course, or complete an independent study project, as a 2L or 3L that requires the writing of a paper for credit.
Most law courses are less about doctrine and more about learning how to analyze legal problems, read cases, distill facts and apply law to facts.
In 1968, the Ford Foundation began disbursing $12 million to persuade law schools to make "law school clinics" part of their curriculum. Clinics were intended to give practical experience in law practice while providing pro bono representation to the poor. However, conservative critics charge that the clinics have been used instead as an avenue for the professors to engage in left-wing political activism. Critics cite the financial involvement of the Ford Foundation as the turning point when such clinics began to change from giving practical experience to engaging in advocacy.
Law schools that offer accelerated JD programs have unique curricula for such programs. Nonetheless, ABA-approved law schools with Accelerated JD programs must meet ABA rules.
Finally, the emphasis in law schools is rarely on the law of the particular state in which the law school sits, but on the law generally throughout the country. Although this makes studying for the bar exam more difficult since one must learn state-specific law, the emphasis on legal skills over legal knowledge can benefit law students not intending to practice in the same state they attend law school.


== Grades, grading, and GPA curves ==

Grades in law school are very competitive. Most schools grade on a curve. In most law schools, the first year curve (1L) is considerably lower than courses taken after the first year of law school.
Many schools use a "median" grading system, that can range from "B-plus medians" to "C-minus medians". Some professors are obliged to determine which exam or paper was the exact median in terms of quality (e.g., the 26th best out of 51), give that paper the relevant grade depending on the system used, and then grade the other exams based on how much better or worse they are than the median. A few schools, such as Yale Law School, Stanford Law School, Harvard Law School, University of California, Berkeley School of Law, and Northeastern University School of Law have alternate grading systems that put less emphasis (or no emphasis) on rank. Other schools, such as New York's Fordham Law School, use a forced grading distribution, where a predetermined percentage of students must receive certain grades. For instance, such a system could oblige professors to award a minimum and maximum number of "A's" and "F's" (e.g., 3.5%/7% A's and 4.5%/10% F's). Many professors chafe against the lack of discretion provided by such systems, especially the required failing of a certain number of students whose performance may have been sub-par but not, in the professor's estimation, worthy of a failing grade. The "median" system seeks to provide some parity among teachers' grading scales while giving the teacher discretion to award a grade below the median only when deserved.
Fairness and equity are the primary reasons for required curves and required grade distributions.  Some faculty tend to give higher grades and others lower grades, with a mandatory curve balancing both extremes.  Also, at law schools with multiple sections of the same class, it minimizes the problem that one section will have an unfair advantage over another section when applying for Law Review or Moot Court.
Even with curved grading, some law schools such as Syracuse University College of Law still have a policy of "Dismissal for Academic Deficiency", in which students failing to meet a minimum GPA are dismissed from the school.
One school that has deviated from the system of competitive grading common to most American law schools is Northeastern University School of Law. Northeastern does not have any system of grade point averages or class rank, Instead, the school uses a system of narrative evaluations to measure student performance.
A system of anonymous grading known as blind grading is used in many law schools in the United States. It is intended to counter bias by the grader. Each semester students are assigned random numbers, usually by the Registrar's Office, which students must include on their exams.  Professors then grade the exams on an anonymous basis, only discovering student names after grades have been submitted to the Registrar's Office. General adoption of blind grading followed admission of significant numbers of minority students to law schools.


== Accelerated JD programs ==

An Accelerated JD program may refer to one of the following:

A program that combines a bachelor's degree with a juris doctor degree ("3+3 JD program" or "BA to JD program").
A two-year juris doctor degree that is offered in a condensed period, separately from a bachelor's degree ("2-year JD program").
As a result of student concerns about the time and cost (both in terms of tuition and the opportunity cost associated with foregoing a salary for three years) required to complete a law degree, there has been an emerging trend to develop accelerated JD programs.


== Pedagogical methods ==

Most law school education in the United States is traditionally based on an approach developed by Christopher Columbus Langdell and James Barr Ames at Harvard Law School during the 1870s. Professors lead in-class debates over the issues in selected court cases, compiled into "casebooks" for each course. Under the Harvard approach, law professors do not deliver lengthy lectures and instead use the Socratic method to force students to teach one another, based on their individual understanding of legal theory and the facts of the case at hand.
Many law schools continue to use the Socratic method—consisting of calling on a student at random, asking about an argument made in an assigned case, asking the student whether they agree with the argument, and then using a series of questions to carefully expose logical flaws in the student's analysis of the argument. Examinations usually entail interpreting the facts of a hypothetical case, determining how legal theories apply to the case, and then writing an essay. This process is intended to train students in the reasoning methods necessary to interpret theories, statutes, and precedents correctly, and argue their validity, both orally and in writing. In contrast, most civil law countries base their legal education on professorial lectures and oral examinations, which are more suited for the mastery of complicated civil codes.
This style of teaching is often disorienting to first-year law students who are more accustomed to taking notes from professors' lectures.. Most casebooks do not clearly outline the law; instead, they force the student to interpret the cases and derive the basic legal concepts from the cases themselves. As a result, many publishers market law school outlines that concisely summarize the basic concepts of each area of law, and good outlines are highly sought after by many students, although some professors discourage their use..
Legal pedagogy has also been criticized by scholars like Alan Watson in his book, The Shame of Legal Education. Some law schools, such as Savannah Law School, have changed direction and created collaborative learning environments to allow students to work directly with each other and professors in order to model the teamwork of attorneys working on a case.
For purposes of passing state bar examinations, some law school graduates find law school instruction inadequate, and resort to specialized bar review courses from private course providers. These bar reviews typically consist of lectures, often video recorded.


== History ==


=== Before law schools ===
Until the late 19th century, law schools were uncommon in the United States. Most people entered the legal profession through reading law, a form of independent study or apprenticeship, often under the supervision of an experienced attorney. This practice usually consisted of reading classic legal texts, such as Edward Coke's Institutes of the Lawes of England and William Blackstone's Commentaries on the Laws of England.
In colonial America law schools did not exist. Within a few years following the American Revolution, some universities such as the College of William and Mary and the University of Pennsylvania established a "Chair in Law". Columbia College appointed its first Professor of Law, James Kent, in 1793. Those who held these positions were the sole purveyors of legal education (per se) for their institutions—though law was, of course, discussed in other academic areas as a matter of course—and gave lectures designed to supplement, rather than replace, an apprenticeship.


=== The first law schools ===
The first institution established for the sole purpose of teaching law was the Litchfield Law School, set up by Judge Tapping Reeve in 1784 to organize the large number of would-be apprentices or lecture attendees that he attracted. Despite the success of that institution, and of similar programs set up thereafter at Harvard University (1817), Dickinson College (1834), Yale University (1843), Albany Law School (1851), Columbia University (1858), and the University of Michigan (1859), law school attendance would remain a rare exception in the profession. Apprenticeship would be the norm until the 1890s, when the American Bar Association (which had been formed in 1878) began pressing states to limit admission to the bar to those who had satisfactorily completed several years of post-graduate instruction. In 1906, the Association of American Law Schools adopted a requirement that law school consist of a three-year course of study.
Another key evolution was from law school as an alternative to undergraduate education to law school as a form of graduate professional education.  Before 1870, there was nothing like a modern university in America, only a number of glorified liberal arts colleges which taught Greek, Latin, moral philosophy, and mathematics to undergraduates.  The early law departments attached to these purported universities, such as the ones at Harvard and Yale, were in competition for those same undergraduates.  Students at the time chose law school or college, but not both.  Law schools were technical schools with "second-class status" which usually had lower admissions standards than the colleges they were competing against for undergraduates. For example, in 1904, Hugo Black was denied admission to the University of Alabama's Academic Department, the ancestor of its College of Arts and Sciences, but he got into its law school.


=== The dominance of Harvard Law School ===
Langdell's deanship from 1870 to 1895 transformed Harvard Law School into the "preeminent law school" in the United States, created the template for the modern American law school, and also established the modern expectation that "institutionalized legal training" was essential for "leaders of the profession".  From 1870 to 1920, Harvard Law School proceeded "to overwhelm all the others" in every way imaginable, to the point that one critic, Gleason Archer Sr., wrote an entire self-published book harshly attacking Harvard as the "educational octopus" whose tentacles (i.e., Langdell's students) reached into every corner of the American legal community.
Langdell turned the law program at Harvard from a disorganized two-year undergraduate program―which undergraduates could wander into at any point―into a carefully structured three-year graduate program leading to a post-baccalaureate degree.  It was also Harvard under Langdell which developed the modern concept of the American law professor, starting with the 1873 hiring of Ames: a career academic with limited practice experience "who was appointed for his scholarly and teaching potential".  Before Ames, law school faculty members were either practicing lawyers who did some part-time teaching on the side, or full-time teachers who had moved into academia only after extensive experience practicing law.
Harvard's dominance was most rapidly established through the wild popularity of its teaching approach: the casebook method combined with the Socratic method. The transition from traditional lectures to the interactive examination of cases became "the law schools' apparent passport to academic respectability".  Langdell actually did not invent that approach to teaching law, but it "became known as his by virtue of his determined and systematic application of the approach." Ames refined the approach further by contributing the ideas that casebooks should focus on cases selected for their "striking facts and vivid opinions", and group them together by subject. Langdell had simply printed cases chronologically.  Finally, Langdell shifted law school examinations from the systematic exposition of rules (before him, students regurgitated legal rules in exam answers in a manner similar to hornbooks) to a problem-solving method tightly focused on the application of legal rules to specific hypothetical fact patterns (which eventually resulted in a common exam response format known as IRAC).  It is this choice of Langdell's which explains why American law took "the atomistic rather than the unitary approach that distinguishes it from other common-law systems today".
The genius of the Harvard approach to teaching law was its financial cost-effectiveness: it was "both cheaper and more exciting for both teacher and student".  Law schools could get away with a much higher ratio of students to professors than under the old system, where the professor would first deliver a lecture dryly summarizing a legal topic, and then try to verify whether students had actually absorbed any information through quizzes and recitations. By 1902, 12 of the 92 American law schools then in existence were already using the Harvard approach, and by 1907, that number was over 30.
Langdell's vision that law programs ought to be offered only at the graduate level and result in a post-baccalaureate degree took much longer to spread to all other American law schools.  As of 1914, only Harvard and Penn were adhering to that principle.  By 1921, the law schools at Stanford, Columbia, Western Reserve, and Yale were requiring a college degree for admission, but they also exempted undergraduates enrolled at the same university from that requirement.
The underlying obstacle was that at the turn of the 20th century, public education was still in its infancy in most of the United States—a defect which the country was belatedly struggling to correct in what is now known as the Progressive Era. In most areas, there were simply not enough high school or college graduates to fill a law school entering class.  In 1899, Cornell University forced its law school to require a high school diploma for admission, like the rest of the university, and the law school saw the size of its entering class crash from 125 to 62. In 1909, Minnesota started to require a single year of college-level work as a prerequisite for law school admission and saw its entering class drop from 203 to 69.


=== Admission of women and people of color ===


==== Women ====

Women were not allowed in most law schools during the late 1800s and the early 1900s. In 1869, two newly opened law schools permitted women to enroll: Washington University School of Law became the first chartered law school in America to admit women, and Howard University School of Law was founded with an open admissions policy accepting Black and White men and women to enroll. The "first woman on record to have received a law degree was Ada Kepley from Union College of Law in Illinois (Northwestern)" in 1870. Some law schools that allowed women before most others were Buffalo Law School which "begun in 1887 ... and open to women and immigrant groups"; University of Iowa College of Law which "admitted women as law students" since at least 1869; University of Michigan Law School; and Boston University School of Law which started admitting women in 1872.
In 1878, two women successfully sued to be admitted to the first class at Hastings Law School, one of whom was Clara S. Foltz. When the University of California established a second law program in 1894, this time on the Berkeley campus, it was open to women and men on an equal basis. Ellen Spencer Mussey and Emma Gillett founded the Washington Law School for women and men in 1898 (now known as, American University Washington College of Law).
The difficulty for women law students was further aggravated by the fact that courts did not allow women to be admitted as lawyers, as demonstrated in the famous case involving Myra Bradwell as the plaintiff in Bradwell v. Illinois (1870). The federal courts were subsequently opened to women in 1878 due to a successful campaign by Belva Ann Lockwood. Elite law schools remained closed to women for a while after.
Spurred by the suffragist movement for women, Harvard Law School started considering admitting women in 1899 but without success. Partly in response to the pressures of the suffragist movement and the unwillingness of elite law schools to open their doors, "in 1908, Portia Law School was founded in Boston" which later became the New England School of Law and was the only law school at the time with "an all women student body". In 1915, due to Harvard's continued refusal to admit women, the Cambridge Law School for Women was established as an alternative to elite law schools, and was to be "as nearly as possible a replica of the Harvard Law School as is possible to make it." World War I encouraged the movement toward admitting women to law schools, and in 1918, Fordham Law School and Yale Law School started admitting women. Northeastern University School of Law, at the time a YMCA institution, started admitting women in 1923. Harvard Law School did not admit women until 1950, and Notre Dame Law School.
Black women faced far greater barriers to entry into law than white women. As of 1940, there were a hundred times as many white women practicing law in the United States as Black women, although the profession remained over 97% white men. At that time, 4,146 white women practiced law (2.3% of all lawyers), along with 1,013 Black men (0.6%), and just 39 Black women in the entire country out of a total of over 177,000.
In spite of advances in admission to elite law schools in the mid-twentieth century, "[i]n 1963, women had comprised only 2.7 percent of the profession. In the academic year 1969–70, only 6.35 percent of the degree candidates at law school were women." A prevalent attitude has been mentioned several times by Hillary Clinton, who recalled that she had been accepted at Harvard Law School in 1969 but had been repelled by a professor who told her at a student-recruitment party, "we don't need any more women at Harvard." (She went to Yale Law School instead.) Attendance of women at law schools did however improve significantly in the next 10-year period. "In 1968, 3,704 of the 62,000 law students in approved schools were women; by 1979, there were 37,534 women out of 117,279 students in approved schools" although still represented in larger proportions in less elite law schools.
In 2016, the number of women enrolled in ABA-approved law schools reached the majority (50.09%), with female students being 55,766 of the total 111,327. Women enrollees have since outnumbered male enrollees every year. In 2024, the most recent year for which data is available, women made up 56.09 percent of all students in ABA-approved law schools. 17 of the top 20 law schools ranked by U.S. News & World Report Best Colleges Ranking in 2024 had more female than male attendees. Sharply increased from 10 percent in 2000, in 2024, 42 percent of law school deans are also women, according to Rosenblatt's Dean Database, 14 percent of whom are black women,


==== People of color ====
The oldest historically black law school in the United States is Howard University School of Law, part of Howard University, a private, federally chartered historically black research university in Washington, D.C. It is one of the oldest law schools in the country. The legal department, led by John Mercer Langston, opened in 1869 to address "a great need to train lawyers who would have a strong commitment to helping black Americans secure and protect their newly established rights" of the tumultuous Reconstruction era. Howard Law was the first school in the nation to have a non-discriminatory admissions policy. From its founding, it admitted white male and female students along with black students. Still, just eight women graduated from Howard Law during the first 30 years of its existence. Charlotte E. Ray was admitted to Howard's law program in 1869 and graduated in 1872, becoming its first black female lawyer. It is reported that Ray applied for admission to the bar using initials for her given and middle names, in order to disguise her gender, because she was "[a]ware of the school's reluctant commitment to the principle of sexual equality."
In 2024, the percentage of black, indigenous and people of color (BIPOC) enrolled in law school increased for the fifth year in a row, from 33.43 percent in 2023 to 36.30 percent in 2024, with BIPOC deans leading one third of law schools in 2024.


==== Notable figures ====
First African American male law graduate: George Lewis Ruffin (1869)
First female law graduate: Ada Kepley (1881) in 1870
First African American female law graduate: Charlotte E. Ray (1872)
First African American male to enroll and graduate from a state-supported law school: Walter Raleigh Jones in 1874
First Chinese male to seek an American legal education: Sit Ming Cook (he was denied admission to a law school around 1878)
First Chinese male to graduate from an American law school: Hong Yen Chang (1888) (c. 1886)
First blind male law graduate: Josiah McIntyre (1889)
First Native American (Chippewa) female law graduate: Marie Louise Bottineau Baldwin in 1914
First Filipino American law graduate: Gonzalo Manibog (1917)
One of the first Cape Verdean-born Americans to graduate with a J.D.: Alfred J. Gomes (1923)
First Navajo male law graduate: Thomas Dodge (1924)
First African American male to enroll in a predominantly-White Southern university since the Reconstruction era: Silas Herbert Hunt (1948)
First Nisei female law graduate: Patsy Mink (1953) in 1951
First African American female law graduate (law school in the South): Ada Lois Sipuel Fisher in 1951
First deaf African American female law graduate: Claudia L. Gordon (c. 2000)
First Potawatomi male: Jeff Crawford


== Credentials obtainable while in law school ==
Within each U.S. law school, key credentials include:

Law review/Law journal membership or editorial position (based either on grades or write-on competition or both). This is important for at least three reasons. First, because it is determined by either grades or writing ability, membership is an indicator of strong academic performance. This leads to the second reason, which is that potential employers sometimes use law review membership in their hiring criteria. Third, work on law review exposes a student to legal scholarship and editing, and often allows the student to publish a significant piece of legal scholarship on his or her own. Most law schools have a "flagship" journal usually called "School name Law Review" (for example, the Harvard Law Review—although some schools call their flagship journal "School name Law Journal"; see Yale Law Journal) that publishes articles on all areas of law, and one or more other specialty law journals that publish articles concerning only a particular area of the law (for example, the Harvard Journal of Law & Technology).
Moot court membership or award (based on oral and written argument). Success in moot court can distinguish one as an outstanding oral advocate and provides a degree of practical legal training that is often absent from law review membership. Moot court and related activities, such as Trial Advocacy and Dispute Resolution, may appeal especially to employers hiring for litigation positions, such as a district attorney's office.
Mock trial membership and awards (based on trial level advocacy skills) also can distinguish one as an outstanding trial advocate and help develop "real world" skills that are often valuable to employers hiring for litigation positions.
Order of the Coif membership (based on grade point average). This is often coupled with Latin honors (summa and magna cum laude, though often not cum laude). However, a slight majority of law schools in the U.S. do not have Order of the Coif chapters.
Phi Delta Phi honor society membership (based on class ranking in the top one-third). This prestigious society is organized around student chapters called "Inns", and the society has inducted many historic figures including five U.S. presidents, two U.S. vice presidents, 14 Supreme Court justices, and numerous members of Congress, Cabinet members, and ambassadors.


=== State and federal court clerkship ===

On the basis of a student's credentials, as well as favorable faculty recommendations, some students obtain a one or two-year clerkship with a judge after graduation. While the majority of  judges traditionally choose incoming clerks while they are still in law school, or as they complete another clerkship, in the 2020s; some judges seek out clerks with some private law practice experience.
Clerkships may be with state or federal judges, and are meant to provide the recent law school graduate with experience working for a judge. Often, clerks engage in significant legal research and writing for the judge, writing memos to assist a judge in coming to a legal conclusion in some cases, and writing drafts of opinions based on the judge's decisions. Appellate court clerkships, although generally more prestigious, do not necessarily give one a great deal of practical experience in the day-to-day life of a lawyer in private practice. The average litigator might get much more out of a clerkship at the trial court level, where they will be learning about motions practices, dealing with lawyers, and generally learning how a trial court works from the inside.
Court clerkships may also provide other valuable assets to a young lawyer; judges often become mentors to their clerks, providing the fledgling attorney with an experienced individual from whom to seek advice. Fellow clerks may also become enduring connections. Law schools encourage graduates to engage in a clerkship to broaden their professional experiences. However, there are fewer clerkships than there are academically eligible graduates.


=== United States Supreme Court clerkship ===
Some law school graduates are able to clerk for one of the Justices on the Supreme Court (each Justice takes two to four clerks per year). Often, these clerks are graduates of elite law schools, with Harvard, Yale, the University of Chicago, the University of Michigan, Columbia, the University of Virginia, and Stanford being among the most highly represented schools. Justice Clarence Thomas is the major exception to the rule that Justices hire clerks from elite schools; he takes pride in selecting clerks from non-top-tier schools, and publicly noted that his clerks have been attacked on the Internet as "third tier trash".
Most Supreme Court clerks have clerked in a lower court, often for a year with a highly selective federal circuit court judge (such as Judges Alex Kozinski, Michael Luttig, J. Harvie Wilkinson, David Tatel, Richard Posner) known as a "feeder judge". It is perhaps the most highly selective and prestigious position a recently graduated lawyer can have, and Supreme Court clerks are often highly sought after by law firms, the government, and law schools. Law firms give Supreme Court clerks as much as a $400,000 bonus for signing with their firm. The vast majority of Supreme Court clerks either become academics at elite law schools, enter private practice as appellate attorneys, or take highly selective government positions.


== Controversies involving U.S. law schools ==


=== Employment statistics and salary information ===

After the JD, a large study of law graduates who passed the bar examination, found that even graduates of lower ranked law schools were typically making six figure ($100,000+) incomes within 12 years after graduation. Graduates of higher ranking schools typically earned more than $170,000.  The Economic Value of a Law Degree, a peer-reviewed study which included law graduates who did not pass the bar exam and were not practicing law, found that law graduates at the 25th percentile of earnings ability typically earned around $20,000 more every year than they would have earned with only a bachelor's degree.  Graduates at the 75th percentile earned around $80,000 more per year than they likely would have earned with a bachelor's degree.  However, only around 60 to 70 percent of law graduates practice law. Some authors have criticized employment information supplied directly by law schools; however, these studies report information supplied directly by law graduates, and in the case of the latter study, collected by the United States Census Bureau as part of a broader economic survey.


=== The New York Times negative press coverage ===
Starting in 2011, American law schools became the subject of a series of critical articles in mainstream news publications, starting with a series of The New York Times articles by David Segal. (The newspaper had also published similarly critical reportage during previous decades.) During the 2010s, such articles have reported on the debt loads of law graduates, the difficulty of securing employment in the legal profession, and insufficient practical training at American law schools. A number of critics have pointed out factual inaccuracies and logical errors in The New York Times' higher education coverage, especially related to law schools.
More recent press coverage by some higher education reporters has noted that peer-reviewed studies and comprehensive data suggests that law graduates are still typically better off financially than they would be had they not attended law school, notwithstanding challenges facing recent graduates.


=== Lawsuits related to American legal education ===
In 1995, the United States Department of Justice sued the American Bar Association, the accrediting body of American law schools, for allegedly violating the Sherman Antitrust Act. The settlement of the suit prohibited the ABA from using salary of faculty or administrators as an accreditation criterion.
In 2011, several law schools were sued for fraud and for misleading job placement statistics. Most of these suits have been dismissed on the merits.


=== Political balance ===

Liberal professors have claimed that there is conservative bias in law schools, particularly within law and economics and business law fields. Liberals have also argued for affirmative action to increase the representation of women and minorities among law students and law faculty.
Conservative students have argued that there is a liberal bias among top tier law faculty.


=== 2024 text message controversy ===
During 2024, female law students, professors and deans across the nation received anonymous text messages complaining that women are outperforming men at law schools on their personal cellphones, stating such as "Law school isn't fair for us men", sparking an FBI investigation.


=== Alaska ===

As of 2024, Alaska remains the only state without a law school. Although some state lawmakers have called for the University of Alaska to establish a law school, a 2004 study commissioned for the University of Alaska Anchorage found little economic justification for this and instead recommended that the state "should begin with a grant or incentive program for law students attending school outside [Alaska]", and to "develop partnerships with ABA accredited law schools to deliver summer programs and externships in Alaska."


=== 2024–2025 protests and recruiting boycotts ===

In 2024, the nation's law students began to organize numerous protests against U.S. involvement in the Gaza war, prompting some lawmakers and law schools to introduce restrictions, as well as harsher responses, in 2025, as President Donald Trump's administration began deporting international students involved in protests.
Following the acquiescence of several elite firms to punitive executive orders issued by President Trump, early in his second term, in 2025; student protests arose, some urging law student application boycotts of the capitulating firms.
A "Biglaw Spine Index: Response to EOs targeting Biglaw" chart was published on April 4 by Above the Law.


== Law school rankings ==

There are several different law school rankings, each with a different emphasis and different methodology. Most either emphasize inputs or readily measurable outcomes (i.e., outcomes shortly after graduation); none measure value-added or long-term outcomes. In general, these rankings are controversial, not universally accepted as authoritative.
U.S. News & World Report's regularly publishes a list of the "Top 100 Law Schools" based on various qualitative and quantitative factors, e.g., entering student LSAT scores and GPAs, reputation surveys, expenditures per student, etc. U.S. News ratings heavily emphasize inputs—student test scores and grades, law school expenditures—but includes some outcomes such as bar passage and employment shortly after graduation. U.S. News rankings are heavily weighted toward "reputation", which is measured through a survey with small sample size and low response rates. The reputation scores are highly correlated with the previous years' reputation scores and may not reflect changes in law school quality over time.
The Social Science Research Network—a repository for draft and completed scholarship in law and the social sciences—publishes monthly rankings of law schools based on the number of times faculty members' scholarship was downloaded. Rankings are available by total number of downloads, total number of downloads within the last 12 months, and downloads per faculty member to adjust for the size of different institutions. SSRN also provides rankings of individual law school faculty members on these metrics.
Brian Leiter compiles a regular series of evaluations called "Brian Leiter's Law School Reports" in which he and other commentators discuss law schools. Leiter's rankings tend to emphasize the quality and quantity of faculty scholarship, as measured by citations in a select group of journals.
Several other ranking systems are explicitly designed to focus on employment outcomes at or shortly after graduation, including rankings by the National Law Journal, Vault.com and Above the Law. The National Law Journal provides a comparison of its employment-based rankings to U.S. News rankings. For students who are primarily interested in lucrative employment outcomes rather than scholarly prestige, this comparison may suggest which law schools are most undervalued by the market.


=== Top 14 law schools ===
The "Top Fourteen" or "T14" are common, colloquial references to the 14 institutions historically listed as the top 14 American law schools by the annual U.S. News & World Report Best Colleges Ranking; "T14" schools are also traditionally the only ones to have ever placed within the top 10 spots of the rankings.  Although "T14" is not a designation used by U.S. News itself, the term is "widely known in the legal community". While these schools have seen their position within the top 14 spots shift frequently, they have generally not placed outside of the top 14 since the inception of the rankings. There have been rare exceptions: Texas and UCLA appeared in the 1987 list, before the start of the annual rankings (ahead of Northwestern and Cornell); Texas and UCLA displaced Georgetown in 2018 and 2022, respectively. Because of their relatively consistent placement at the top of these rankings, the schools that have taken the annual top spots since 1990 are commonly referred to as the "Top Fourteen" by published books on law school admissions, undergraduate university pre-law advisers, professional law school consultants, and newspaper articles on the subject.
Those 14 schools, alphabetically, are: Berkeley, Chicago, Columbia, Cornell, Duke, Georgetown, Harvard, Michigan, New York University, Northwestern, Penn, Stanford, Virginia, and Yale.
One study suggests that, after controlling for students' incoming credentials, earnings and employment outcomes are better at lower ranked ABA approved law schools than at higher ranked law schools—that is, lower ranked law schools may do more to improve outcomes than higher ranked schools.


=== Regional tiers and lower-tier national schools ===
Most law schools outside the top tier are more regional in scope and often have very strong regional connections to these post-graduation opportunities. For example, a student graduating from a lower-tier law school may find opportunities in that school's "home market": the legal market containing many of that school's alumni, where most of the school's networking and career development energies are focused. In contrast, an upper-tier law school may find employment opportunities in a broader geographic region.


=== State-authorized schools ===
Many schools are authorized or accredited by a state and some have been in continuous operation for over 95 years. Most are located in Alabama, California, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania and Tennessee, and in Puerto Rico. Some state authorized law schools are maintained to offer a non-ABA option, experimenting with lower cost options.
Graduates of non-ABA approved law schools have much lower bar passage rates than same-race graduates of ABA-approved law schools in the same state.


=== Unaccredited schools ===
Some schools are not accredited by a state or the American Bar Association. Most are located in California. Such schools in California are registered and licensed to operate by The State Bar of California Committee of Bar Examiners (CBE), but are not accredited by the ABA. Their first year students are required to take the First-Year Law Students' Examination (FYLSE), also known as the  ("baby bar"), which then authorizes continuing their legal studies. Graduates of non-ABA accredited schools may then take the California Bar Examination. After passing the Bar, they are then licensed to practice law in California. Many other jurisdictions do not allow graduates of unaccredited law schools to sit for their state bar examination. In California, graduates of non-ABA approved law schools have much lower bar passage rates than same-race graduates of ABA-approved law schools in the same state.


== Oldest active law schools ==
Law schools are listed by the dates from when they were first established.

William & Mary Law School, established 1779 (closed in 1861 and reopened in 1920)
University of Maryland Francis King Carey School of Law, established 1816, held first classes in 1824 (closed during the American Civil War and reopened shortly after its end)
Harvard Law School, established 1817 (oldest continuously open school)
University of Virginia School of Law, established 1819
Yale Law School, established 1824
University of Cincinnati College of Law, established 1833
Pennsylvania State University Dickinson School of Law, established 1834
New York University School of Law, established 1835
Indiana University Maurer School of Law, established 1842
Saint Louis University School of Law, established in 1843 (closed in 1847 and reopened in 1908)
University of North Carolina School of Law, established 1845
Louis D. Brandeis School of Law (University of Louisville), established 1846
Cumberland School of Law, established in 1847
Tulane University Law School, established 1847
Washington and Lee University School of Law, established 1849
Baylor Law School, established 1849 (closed in 1883 and reestablished 1920)
University of Pennsylvania Law School, established 1850
Albany Law School, established 1851
University of Mississippi School of Law, established 1854
Columbia Law School, established 1858


== See also ==
List of law schools in the United States
List of law schools attended by United States Supreme Court justices
IRAC
Law School Admission Council
Correspondence law school
School of Canon Law


== References ==.
The Grotius Lectures is a series of annual lectures sponsored by the American Society of International Law since 1999.  The lecture is named in honour of the famous Dutch jurist, Hugo Grotius (1583–1645), considered by many to be the 'father of international law.'  Over the past decade, the lecture has been delivered by a leading international law scholar or international lawyer.  The lecture is customarily read at the opening of the annual meeting of the ASIL, usually held in late March or April each year.  

The American Grotius Lecture should not be confused with the annual Grotius Lecture held at the British Institute of International and Comparative Law (the successor to the Grotius Society).


== See also ==
American Society of International Law
American University, Washington College of Law
American Journal of International Law
The American University International Law Review (which publishes the annual Grotius Lecture).
The Acts Interpretation Act 1901 (Cth) is an Interpretation Act of the Parliament of Australia which establishes rules for the interpretation of Australian Acts and other legislation. The Act applies only to Commonwealth legislation, with each state and the self-governing territory having its own legislation.


== The Act ==
The Act sets out rules for the commencement (Part II), repeal and expiration (Part III) of Commonwealth acts; general provisions (Part IV) including what material may be considered when interpreting an act (Part V); the meaning of words and expression commonly used in legislation (Part VI) and judicial expressions in legal proceedings (Part VII); the measurement and expression of distance and time (Part VIII); how legislation may be cited (Part IX); and provides rules about the interpretation of legislative instruments (secondary legislation) and resolutions of the Parliament (Part XI).


== Analysis ==
The Act was the second of the 1st Parliament in its first session and "the first substantive Commonwealth act to be enacted.".
When introduced in 1901, the Act was modelled on and adopted many of the rules set out in the Interpretation Act 1889 (Imp) and also adopted "some of the special provisions of the New South Wales Interpretation Act of 1897". In some cases, the rules of the Imperial Parliament at Westminster were preferred: for example, the New South Wales statute provided that distance be measured according to the nearest route ordinarily used, but the Commonwealth adopted the Imperial provision of a straight line on a horizontal plane. In other cases, it preferred the colonial New South Wales rules: for example, the financial year was made to end on 30 June, not, as in England and Wales, on 31 March. Some rules did not mandate a uniform national standard but made allowances for local variations: for example, references to time were to be read so that "such time shall, unless it is otherwise specifically stated, be deemed in each State or part of the Commonwealth to mean the standard or legal time in that State or part".


=== Common Law ===
When first enacted, the Act codified the common law in some cases. For example, there is a presumption at common law that parliament intends its legislation to operate only on persons and matters within its territory. The Act repeated that presumption at section 21(1)(b): if an act was silent on the question, then the provision operated to confine the act in its territorial reach. However, parliament may override the presumption and the section to give extraterritorial operation to the enactment by express words or "necessary implication".
In other cases, the Act reversed the common law. For example, there was a common law rule that, when interpreting statutes, courts could not consider "extrinsic material" such as a minister's second reading speech made when the statute was before parliament. The Act, by s.15AB reversed this rule, giving courts access to a wide range of material which would otherwise have been excluded.
Where there are conflicting common law rules, the Act sometimes gives preference to one approach. For example, there is sometimes seen to be a conflict between a "literal" and "purposive" reading of statutes; by s. 15AA, the Act mandates a purposive approach. The use of a purposive approach was affirmed in Australia in Bropho v Western Australia (1990).


== See also ==
Interpretation Act


== References ==


== External links ==
Acts Interpretation Act 1901 (Cth) at Australian Government - Federal Register of Legislation
Acts Interpretation Act 1901 (Cth) at AustLII.
The Interpretation Act 1978 (c. 30) is an act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom. The act makes provision for the interpretation of acts of Parliament, Measures of the General Synod of the Church of England, Measures of the Church Assembly, subordinate legislation, "deeds and other instruments and documents", acts of the Scottish Parliament and instruments made thereunder (added 1998), and Measures and acts of the National Assembly for Wales and instruments made thereunder. The act makes provision in relation to: the construction of certain words and phrases, words of enactment, amendment or repeal of Acts in the Session they were passed, judicial notice, commencement, statutory powers and duties, the effect of repeals, and duplicated offences.
The Interpretation Act (Northern Ireland) 1954 applies in the same way to Acts of the Parliament of Northern Ireland or Acts of the Northern Ireland Assembly.


== Section 7 ==
Section 7 of the act, concerned with service of documents by post, replaced section 26 of the Interpretation Act 1889 (52 & 53 Vict. c. 63). It states that

Where an Act authorises or requires any document to be served by post (whether the expression "serve" or the expression "give" or "send" or any other expression is used) then, unless the contrary intention appears, the service is deemed to be effected by properly addressing, pre-paying and posting a letter containing the document and, unless the contrary is proved, to have been effected at the time at which the letter would be delivered in the ordinary course of post. Interpretation of the words unless the contrary is proved is discussed in the case of Calladine-Smith v Saveorder Ltd, as to whether the "contrary" means the contrary of the allegation that the letter was properly addressed, prepaid and posted, or whether it refers to the contrary of the deeming provision that the letter in question was delivered in the ordinary course of post. In this particular case, a letter was shown to have been properly addressed, pre-paid and posted, but not received. On a balance of probabilities the court accepted that the "contrary" to the deemed provision had been proved, the letter was not received, and therefore the deemed provision could not hold.


== Section 16 – General savings ==
The following cases are relevant to this section:

Hough v Windus (1884) 12 QBD 224, CA
R v Fisher (Charles) [1969] 1 WLR 8, CA
R v West London Stipendiary Magistrate, ex parte Simeon [1983] AC 234, HL


== Section 18 – Duplicated offences ==
Section 18 of the act provides:

Where an act or omission constitutes an offence under two or more Acts, or both under an Act and at common law, the offender shall, unless the contrary intention appears, be liable to be prosecuted and punished under either or any of those Acts or at common law, but shall not be liable to be punished more than once for the same offence.
This section replaces section 33 of the Interpretation Act 1889 (52 & 53 Vict. c. 63). Humphreys J. said that that section did not add anything to the common law, or detract anything from it.


=== "... shall not be liable to be punished more than once for the same offence" ===
The words "same offence" at the end of section 18 of the act do not mean "same act" or "same cause". A person may be punished more than once for the same act. Two prosecutions for a single false statement in a brochure is not oppressive.
See also Williams v Hallam (1943) 112 LJKB 353, (1943) 59 TLR 287, (1943) 41 LGR 165.


== Notes ==


== References ==
Halsbury's Statutes. Fourth Edition. 2008 Reissue. Volume 41. Page 796.
Archbold Criminal Pleading, Evidence and Practice. 1999. Appendix A.
Current Law Statutes Annotated 1978


== External links ==
 The full text of Interpretation Act 1978 at Wikisource
The Interpretation Act 1978, as amended from the National Archives.
The Interpretation Act 1978, as originally enacted from the National Archives.
Hutton, Sir Noel THE BRITISH INTERPRETATION ACT..
Re Rizzo & Rizzo Shoes Ltd is a 1998 judgment from the Supreme Court of Canada regarding the priority of employees interests when a company declares bankruptcy. The judgment hinged on the interpretation of the Employment Standards Act and has been taken to mark the Supreme Court of Canada's adoption of the purposive approach to legislative interpretation. It has since been frequently cited in subsequent decisions of Canadian courts, nearly every time legislation is interpreted.


== Background ==
Rizzo & Rizzo Shoes Ltd. was a retail shoe store with 215 locations, 65 per cent of which were located in Ontario. Rizzo Shoes filed for bankruptcy; employees subsequently lost their jobs. The company paid all wages, salaries, commissions, and vacation pay through termination. The Ministry of Labour for the Province of Ontario audited the company to ensure that no further payments were owed to former employees under the Employment Standards Act (ESA). Proof of claim was submitted to a trustee, who subsequently disallowed the claim. According to the trustee, a company's bankruptcy does not constitute dismissal from employment; thus, the former employees of Rizzo & Rizzo Shoes gained no positive right to severance, termination or vacation pay under the ESA.
The case went before the Ontario Court (General Division) where the judge agreed with the Ministry of Labour and allowed the former employees to be paid. However, the Ontario Court of Appeal overturned the ruling and restored the Trustee's decision. The Ministry sought leave to appeal from the Court of Appeal judgment but discontinued its application. Following the discontinuance of the appeal, the Trustee paid a dividend to Rizzo's creditors, thereby leaving significantly less funds in the estate. Subsequently, the appellants, five former employees of Rizzo, moved to set aside the discontinuance, add themselves as parties to the proceedings, and requested and were granted an order granting them leave to appeal.


== Ruling ==
In the unanimous decision, the Supreme Court allowed the employees' appeal holding that they were entitled to the payments. While the plain language of the Act seemed to suggest that termination pay and severance pay were payable only when the employer terminates the employment, the Court held that the words of an Act must be read in their entire context and in their grammatical and ordinary sense harmoniously with the scheme of the Act, the object of the Act, and the intention of Parliament.
Iacobucci J. wrote:
Elmer Driedger in Construction of Statutes (2nd ed. 1983) best encapsulates the approach upon which I prefer to rely. He recognizes that statutory interpretation cannot be founded on the wording of the legislation alone. At p. 87 he states
Today there is only one principle or approach, namely, the words of an Act are to be read in their entire context and in their grammatical and ordinary sense harmoniously with the scheme of the Act, the object of the Act, and the intention of Parliament.
(Re Rizzo & Rizzo Shoes Ltd [1998] 1 S.C.R. 27, at para 21, quoting E. A. Driedger, The Construction of Statutes (2nd ed 1983), at p. 87)
The Court of Appeal had failed to read the language of the Act in this broad manner the Supreme Court held. It noted that the purpose of the termination and severance pay provisions were to protect employees, to recognize their service and investment in the employer's enterprise and to cushion them against the adverse effects of economic dislocation. To hold that (more junior) employees terminated prior to bankruptcy would be entitled to termination and severance pay while (more senior) employees terminated upon bankruptcy  would be absurd, the Court held:

The trial judge properly noted that, if the ESA termination and severance pay provisions do not apply in circumstances of bankruptcy, those employees “fortunate” enough to have been dismissed the day before a bankruptcy would be entitled to such payments, but those terminated on the day the bankruptcy becomes final would not be so entitled.  In my view, the absurdity of this consequence is particularly evident in a unionized workplace where seniority is a factor in determining the order of lay-off. The more senior the employee, the larger the investment he or she has made in the employer and the greater the entitlement to termination and severance pay. However, it is the more senior personnel who are likely to be employed up until the time of the bankruptcy and who would thereby lose their entitlements to these payments.
The Court also held that the legislative history of the termination and severance pay provisions and the other provisions in the ESA supported an interpretation that such benefits were payable to employees whose employment is terminated upon bankruptcy. The Court also ordered the Ministry of Labour to pay the employees' costs, since it had not provided the Court with any evidence as to the effort it made to notify or secure the consent of the Rizzo employees before it discontinued its application for leave to appeal to this Court on their behalf.


== See also ==
List of Supreme Court of Canada cases
Employment Standards Act


== References ==


== External links ==
Full text of Supreme Court of Canada decision available at LexUM and CanLII
Ontario Ministry of Labour Employment Standards
Case Briefs Rizzo & Rizzo Shoes Ltd. (Re).
The Arab Lawyers Union (ALU; Arabic: اتحاد المحامين العرب) is a professional association of lawyers from across the Arab world. Founded in 1944, the ALU seeks to promote the legal profession in the Arab world and to defend the rights of Arabs.


== History ==
The Arab Lawyers Union was founded in Cairo, Egypt, in 1944 by a group of Arab lawyers, including Tawfiq al-Hakim. The union was created in response to the growing need for a professional association of lawyers that could represent the interests of Arab lawyers and their clients in the face of colonialism and foreign domination in the Arab world.
In 2001, the Arab Lawyers Union distributed a book whose cover bore a swastika and the Star of David interconnected, at the World Conference against Racism 2001.
In March 2004, the Arab Lawyers Union formed a "defence committee" for former president Saddam Hussein and other Iraqi prisoners.
In October 2012, the Arab Lawyers Union presented their top award to suicide bomber Hanadi Jaradat who killed 21 Jewish and Arab Israelis, and sent a delegation to her family to present them with the award.  Ayman Abu Eisheh, a member of the Palestine Committee at the Arab Lawyers Union, said that the ALU were proud of Jaradat, and that her suicide bombing was "in defense of Palestine and the Arab nation."
Over the years, the Arab Lawyers Union has grown in size, and today it is one of the largest professional associations of lawyers in the Arab world. It is headquartered in Cairo, and has branches and affiliated organizations in a number of Arab countries, including Algeria, Bahrain, Jordan, Lebanon, Morocco, Palestine, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Tunisia, and Yemen.


== Leadership and Governance ==
The Arab Lawyers Union is governed by a General Assembly, which meets every three years to elect a President and other officers, review the union's activities and policies, and set the agenda for the next three years.


== References ==.
In law, an abstract is a brief statement that contains the main information of a long legal document or of several related legal papers.


== Types of legislation ==

The abstract title, used in real estate transactions, is the more common form of abstract. An abstract title lists all the owners of a piece of land, a house, or a building before it came into possession of the present owner. The abstract also records all deeds, wills, mortgages, and other documents that affect ownership of the property. An abstract describes a chain of transfers from owner to owner and any agreements by former owners that are binding on later owners.


== Patent law ==
In the context of patent law and specifically in prior art searches, searching through abstracts is a common way to find relevant prior art document to question for novelty or inventive step (or non-obviousness in United States patent law) of an invention. Under United States patent law, the abstract may be called "Abstract of the Disclosure".


== References ==


== External links ==
Rule 8 PCT, defining the requirements regarding the abstract in an international application filed under Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT)
Article 85 EPC and Rule 47 EPC (previously Rule 33 EPC 1973), defining the abstract-related requirements in a European patent application.
In legal research, a citator is a citation index of legal resources, one of the best-known of which in the United States is Shepard's Citations.  Given a reference of a legal decision, a citator allows the researcher to find newer documents which cite the original document and thus to reconstruct the judicial history of cases and statutes. A citator can also be used to determine whether a statute or regulation has been amended, repealed, superseded, or held unconstitutional. Using a citator in this way is colloquially referred to as "Shepardizing".


== Use in legal research ==


=== Topical research ===
Because cases cite related cases, citators can be used to find cases which are on topics related to a given topic.  A common research strategy is to use "one good case" to find related cases.


=== Establishing authority ===
Another important application is to determine whether the conclusions of one case have been followed, overturned, or modified in later cases, especially by higher courts. This is important for legal systems in which the binding authority of a case is contingent on precedent.
Citators often include annotations indicating the history and treatment of a case in citing opinions.  Shepard's notes 'history' as affirmed, modified, reversed, same case, Superseded, or vacated; and 'treatment' as criticised, distinguished, explained, j dissenting opinion, ~ consenting opinion, Limited, overruled, or questioned.
Although originally distributed only as printed and bound volumes, citators are now typically on-line services such as LexisNexis's online Shepard's Citations, Justis Publishing's provider-neutral JustCite, Westlaw's KeyCite, Bloomberg Law's BCite, and the Oxford Law Citator of Oxford University Press.


== History ==
Citation indexes to the Bible date to the 13th century.
In English legal literature, volumes of judicial reports included lists of cases cited in that volume starting with Raymond's Reports (1743) and followed by Douglas's Reports (1783). Simon Greenleaf (1821) published an alphabetical list of cases with notes on later decisions affecting the precedential authority of the original decision.
The first true citation index dates to the 1860 publication of Labatt's Table of Cases...California..., followed in 1872 by Wait's Table of Cases...New York.... But the most important and best-known citation index came with the 1873 publication of Shepard's Citations.
Frank Shepard Company started publishing citators in New York City in 1873 and other companies provided similar services at around the same time, e.g. George Fred Williams's Massachusetts citations: a table of cases, overruled, denied, doubted, criticised, approved, and cited by the Supreme Judicial Court (Boston, 1878).
The name 'citator' appears to have been coined by the Citator Publishing Company (Detroit) in 1908 in The Citator: an annotated compilation of citations of the Kansas Supreme Court....


== Further reading ==
"Mastering The Lawless Science Of Our Law: A Story Of Legal Citation Indexes." Patti Ogden, Law Library Journal Winter 1993 (85 Law Libr. J. 1)
"Citators: Past, Present, and Future." Laura C. Dabney, Legal Reference Services Quarterly 27 (2-3), 2004 (27 L. Reference Servs. Q. 165)


== Notes ==


== External links ==
Using KeyCite on Westlaw from Westlaw
How to Shepardize from LexisNexis.
Using BCite from Bloomberg Law.
LawMoose, launched in September 2000, is believed to have been the first U.S. regional legal search engine operating its own independent web crawler.
Initially LawMoose provided a searchable index drawn from Minnesota law and government sites. Later, it added a similar capability for Wisconsin law sites and select general legal reference starting point sites.
LawMoose has since evolved into a hybrid bi-level public and subscription legal knowledge environment, featuring a thesaurus-based topical map of legal and governmental web resources (which spans the U.S. and globe and adds non-legal resources in a subscriber edition), a list of the largest one hundred Minnesota law firms, ranked by number of Minnesota lawyers, the Minnesota Legal Periodical Index, listing and topically categorizing more than 39,000 thousand articles published in Minnesota legal publications from 1984 to the present (in the public edition), and a densely interconnected, constantly evolving legal words, phrases, concepts and resources knowledge graph (in a subscriber edition).
LawMoose's legal words, phrases, concepts and resources knowledge graph consists of more than 337,000 legal, governmental, business, insurance, and popular terms, interconnected through more than 1,425,000 semantic relationships. Interconnections are based on a relationships vocabulary of 300 relationship types. This multi-dimensional intellectual network functions as a navigable intellectual model of law and law practice.
This semantic, intellectual network-based approach to organizing legal knowledge, legal diagnostic and problem solving concepts, law practice processes, and conceptually locating legal and law practice resources is a significant departure from traditional hierarchical, case law-specific legal taxonomies, such as the taxonomy utilized by the West American Digest System and from collections of searchable primary law.
The Minnesota Legal Periodical Index has been continuously maintained by the Minnesota State Law Library since 1984. Since 2002, it has appeared on LawMoose through a collaboration with LawMoose publisher, Pritchard Law Webs, Minneapolis, Minnesota.


== See also ==
FindLaw


== References ==
Locating Legal Information on the Web 2004 Archived 2015-01-16 at the Wayback Machine Minnesota Association of Law Libraries


== External links ==
LawMoose Minnesota
The One Hundred Largest Law Firms in Minnesota
Minnesota Legal Periodical Index
LawMoose Wisconsin
LawMoose called "high quality free law source" by Legal Information Institute co-founder Peter Martin, December 8, 2012
Web Critic - LawMoose Expands Its Roaming Range Archived 2014-01-11 at the Wayback Machine LLRX, September 30, 2002
LawMoose named Netlawtools 2001 Site of the Year..
Frank Shepard (c. 1848–1900) was a salesman for a Chicago legal publisher who invented the Shepard's legal citation system.


== Invention of citation system ==
In September, 1875, a small announcement in the Chicago Legal News reported that Shepard was opening his own shop:

The firm of James Cockroft and Co. of New York, formerly of this city, have opened a branch office in this city at No. 8 Honore Block, for the sale of their publications, which will be under the charge of Frank Shepard, who is well known to the bar as having been in the law book house of E.B. Myers of this city for the last four years, and formerly with Mr. Cockroft. Frank is an efficient and obliging young man, and we hope he may succeed in his undertaking.
In the same year, he also designed and published the first of his many citation books, Illinois Citations.  (Traditionally, the date is given as 1873, but there is evidence that he did not begin until 1875.) Shepard was surely aware of George R. Wendling's citation index, since it was published by the very firm for whom he had worked as a salesman, E.B. Myers & Co.  Shepard envisioned and announced in his first publication that he would issue citation books for all the states.
Shepard also began printing gummed labels for each case, listing the cases that cited it. To help the lawyers quickly learn why one case had been cited by another, Shepard's started including one-letter codes to show that the citing case had overruled, criticized, modified, or applied some other treatment to the cited case. The stickers, or “Adhesive Annotations,” became very popular. While sitting on the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court, future United States Supreme Court Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr. wrote “I regard Shepard’s Massachusetts Annotations as the most thorough labor-saving device that has even been brought to my attention. No one owning a set of reports can afford to be without one.” The books became so popular that the name became a verb—to Shepardize.


== Frank Shepard Company ==
The Frank Shepard Company began producing alternatives to the sticker collections: bound books that listed, for each case, the cases that cited it and codes describing the citing case's treatment.


== Personal life ==
Shepard did not rely solely upon his annotations for income.  An 1889 journal carried an ad for "Frank Shepard, Law Book Seller and Publisher, 184 Dearborn St., Chicago." The ad announced that he sold the new American and English Encyclopedia of Law. It also indicated that he manufactured "[g]enuine gold leaf book labels, collection registers, legal file covers, reference book stands, legal blank cases, [and] steel engravings of eminent lawyers." No mention was made of his annotations. 10 CHI. L.J. (Feb. 1889) (advertisement).
Shepard died in 1900, at age 52, of apoplexy.


== See also ==
Shepardize
Shepard's citations


== References ==


== Further reading ==
"Mastering The Lawless Science Of Our Law: A Story Of Legal Citation Indexes." Patti Ogden, Law Library Journal Winter 1993 (85 Law Libr. J. 1)
Shapiro, Fred R. (1992). "Origins of bibliometrics, citation indexing, and citation analysis: The neglected legal literature". Journal of the American Society for Information Science. 43 (5): 337–339. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-4571(199206)43:5<337::AID-ASI2>3.0.CO;2-T..
The administration of justice is the process by which the legal system of a government is executed. The presumed goal of such an administration is to provide justice for all those accessing the legal system.


== Australia ==
In Attorney General for New South Wales v Love (1898), the appellant argued that section 24 of the Act 9 Geo 4 c 83 did not have the effect applying the Nullum Tempus Act (9 Geo 3 c 16) (1768) to New South Wales. Counsel for the appellant said that Whicker v Hume (1858) decided that section 24 referred not to laws generally, but only to laws as to modes of procedure, and that the Nullum Tempus Act did not deal merely with procedure. The Lord Chancellor said that the Act 9 Geo 4 c 83 prima facie "applied the Nullum Tempus Act to the Colony in question as much as if it had re-enacted it for that Colony." He then said:

Sect. 24 of that Act provides "that all the laws and statutes in force within the realm of England at the passing of this Act" (that is to say, the year 1828) "shall be applied in the administration of justice in the courts of New South Wales," and it is sought by construction to limit the words "all laws and statutes" by introducing into the section the words "having relation to procedure" or some equivalent expression. At least that is the only intelligible mode in which the argument can be supported, because the words which do occur in the section - "in the administration of justice" - would certainly include a limitation of the time within which actions can be brought, and their Lordships are of the opinion that the language of the section cannot be limited so as to exclude the statute, which for the reasons pointed out by the learned judges were and are so important in the administration of justice in the Colony.


== Canada ==
Section 92(14) of the Constitution Act, 1867, also known as the Administration of Justice power, grants the provincial legislatures of Canada the authority to legislate on:

14. The Administration of Justice in the Province, including the Constitution, Maintenance, and Organization of Provincial Courts, both of Civil and of Criminal Jurisdiction, and including Procedure in Civil Matters in those Courts.


=== Ontario ===
Section 1 of the Administration of Justice Act (RSO 1990 c A6) provides:

In this Act, "administration of justice" means the provision, maintenance and operation of,
(a) the courts of justice of the Province of Ontario,
(b) land registry offices,
(c) jails, and
(d) the offices of coroners and Crown Attorneys,
for the performance of their functions, including any functions delegated to such courts, institutions or offices or any official thereof by or under any Act; (“administration de la justice”)
This provision was previously section 1 of the Administration of Justice Act (RSO 1980 c 6), which was previously section 1 of Administration of Justice Act (RSO 1970 c 6), which was previously section 1 of Administration of Justice Act 1968 (SO 1968 c 1) (17 Eliz 2 c 1). Queen's Printer copies of the Statutes of the province of Ontario 1968 describe this provision as "new". This statute replaced the Administration of Justice Expenses Act (RSO 1960 c 5).


== Ireland ==
"Offence against the Administration of Justice" is defined by section 7 of the Criminal Procedure Act 2010.


== United Kingdom ==
In England, the Administration of Justice is a prerogative of the Crown. It may be exercised only through duly-appointed judges and courts.
The following matters and things pertain to the Administration of Justice: the organisation of the courts; the prerogative of justice, the prerogative of mercy, and any prerogative power to create new courts; nolle prosequi; the appointment, tenure and immunity of judges; the immunity of other participants in legal proceedings; contempt of court; the composition and availability of juries, any requirement that their verdict be unanimous, and the allowances they receive; the branches of the legal profession; and the provision of legal aid and advice.
The Administration of Justice is an act which is normally associated with the carrying on of the business of government. When a government does that act, it is thereby exercising its sovereignty. It would accordingly be a violation of British sovereignty for a foreign government to do that act in British territory without authorisation. Section 2 of the Visiting Forces Act 1952 authorises foreign service courts to exercise their jurisdiction in the United Kingdom.
There are offences against the Administration of Justice.
For the purpose of section 54 of the Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996, the following are Administration of Justice offences:

The offence of perverting the course of justice
The offence under section 51(1) of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994
An offence of aiding, abetting, counselling, procuring, suborning or inciting another person to commit an offence under section 1 of the Perjury Act 1911.
The offence of perverting the course of justice has been referred to as "interfering with the Administration of Justice" and/or "obstructing the Administration of Justice".
Section 6(c) of the Contempt of Court Act 1981 provides that nothing in the foregoing provisions of that Act restricts liability for contempt of court in respect of conduct intended to impede or prejudice the Administration of Justice.
An Arrestable offence, other than one specified in Schedule 5 to the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, was serious for the purposes of that Act if it led to, or was intended or likely to lead to, amongst other things, serious interference with the Administration of Justice. An arrestable offence which consisted of making a threat was serious for the purposes of that Act if carrying out the threat would be likely to lead to, amongst other things, serious interference with the Administration of Justice.
In any legal proceedings held in public, the court may, where it appears to be necessary for avoiding a substantial risk of prejudice to the Administration of Justice in those proceedings, or in any other proceedings pending or imminent, order that the publication of any report of the proceedings, or any part of the proceedings, be postponed for such period as the court thinks necessary for that purpose.
Information which is not exempt information by virtue of section 30 of the Freedom of Information Act 2000 is exempt information if its disclosure under that Act would, or would be likely to, prejudice the Administration of Justice.


== Quotes ==
Roscoe Pound said: "Dissatisfaction with the administration of justice is as old as the law".


== See also ==
Administration of Justice Act
Open court principle


== References ==


== Bibliography ==
James, John S. "Administration". Stroud's Judicial Dictionary of Words and Phrases. Sweet & Maxwell. London. 1971. SBN 421 14290 1. Page 68.
Bar Council. Code of Conduct for the Bar of England and Wales. 5th Edition. Paras 201(a)(ii) and (iii) and 202.
G Glover Alexander. The Administration of Justice in Criminal Matters (In England and Wales). Cambridge University Press. First Published 1915. Reissued 1919. ISBN 978 0 521 18348 2. Google Books.
William H Morley. The Administration of Justice in British India; Its Past History and Present State: Comprising an Account of the Laws Peculiar to India. Williams and Norgate. 1858. Google Books.
Miller, John. On the Administration of Justice in the British Colonies in the East-Indies. Parbury, Allen and Co. London, Leadenhall Street. 1828. Google Books.
"Contracts prejudicial to the Administration of Justice". T Anthony Downes. Textbook on Contract. Fourth Edition. Blackstone Press. 1995. Paragraph 8.7.3.2 at page 188.


== External links ==.
Indian country is any of the self-governing Native American or American Indian communities throughout the United States. Colloquially, this refers to lands governed by federally recognized tribes and state recognized tribes. The concept of tribal sovereignty legally recognizes tribes as distinct, independent nations within the United States. As a legal category, it includes "all land within the limits of any Indian reservation", "all dependent Indian communities within the borders of the United States", and "all Indian allotments, the Indian titles to which have not been extinguished." Native tribes which are not recognized by the government can seek recognition. Multiple tribes that had their relationship with the federal government terminated have not regained federal recognition.
The American military has since applied the term to sovereign land outside its control, including land in Vietnam.


== Legal classification ==

This legal classification defines American Indian tribal and individual land holdings as part of a reservation, dependent Indian community, an allotment, or a public domain allotment:

All federal trust lands held for Native American tribes are Indian country. Federal, state, and local governments use this category in their legal processes. Today, however, according to the U.S. Census of 2010, over 78% of all Native Americans live off reservations. Indian country now spans thousands of rural areas, towns and cities where Indian people live. This convention is followed generally in colloquial speech and is reflected in publications such as the Native American newspaper Indian Country Today.


== Related and historical meanings ==
Historically, Indian country was considered the areas, regions, territories or countries beyond the frontier of settlement that were inhabited primarily by Native Americans. Colonists made treaties with Native Americans, agreeing to offer services and protection indefinitely in exchange for peaceful transfer of Native American land. Many of these treaties were arranged and signed through coercion, and many treaty agreements were violated or ignored.


=== Between the Appalachians and Mississippi ===

As the original 13 colonies grew and treaties were made, the de facto boundary between settled territory and Indian country during the 18th century was roughly the crest of the Appalachian Mountains, a boundary set into law by the Royal Proclamation of 1763, the Confederation Congress Proclamation of 1783, and later by the Nonintercourse Act. The Indian Reserve was gradually settled by European Americans and divided into territories and states, starting with Kentucky County (an extension of Virginia) and the Northwest Territory.


=== West of the Mississippi ===

Most Indians in the area of the former Reserve were either killed or relocated further west under policies of Indian Removal. After the Louisiana Purchase, the Indian Intercourse Act of 1834 created the Indian Territory west of the Mississippi River as a destination. It too was gradually divided into territories and states for European American settlement, leaving only modern Indian Reservations inside the boundaries of U.S. states.
In 2020, the United States Supreme Court ruled in McGirt v. Oklahoma that the tribal statistical area (and former reservation) of the Muscogee (Creek) Nation remains under the tribal sovereignty of the Muscogee (Creek) Nation for the purposes of the Major Crimes Act.


=== American military usage ===


==== Vietnam War ====
During the Vietnam War circa 1968, the American military and pilots referred to free-fire zones under South Vietnamese control as "Indian Country." American military personnel also used the term "savage" and "uncivilized" to refer to its inhabitants.

During a 1971 congressional hearing, American airborne ranger Robert Bowie Johnson Jr. defined the term to politician John F. Seiberling:...it means different things to different people. It is like there are savages out there, there are gooks out there. In the same way we slaughtered the Indian's buffalo, we would slaughter the water buffalo in Vietnam.In 1989, Tom Holm claimed Vietnam War usage of this term was "in obvious mimicry of the old Cavalry versus Indian films".


==== Iraq and Afghanistan ====
The term is used by "soldiers, military strategists, reporters, and World Wide Web users to refer to hostile, unsecured, and dangerous territory in Iraq and Afghanistan."


== See also ==
Aboriginal title in the United States
Indian country jurisdiction
Native American reservation politics
Off-reservation trust land
Oklahoma Tribal Statistical Area
Tribal sovereignty in the United States
Land Buy-Back Program for Tribal Nations


== References ==

N. Bruce Duthu, American Indians and the  Law (NY: Penguin Library -Viking - 2008)
David H. Getches, Charles F. Wilkinson, and Robert A. Williams, jr., Cases and Materials on Federal Indian Law, 4th Ed. (St. Paul: West Pub., 1998)
Imre Sutton, ed., "The Political Geography of Indian Country." American Indian Culture and Research Journal, 15(02) 1991
https://www.census.gov/prod/cen2010/briefs/c2010br-10.pdf.
In law, an alien is a foreign-born resident who has not been naturalized and is still a citizen or subject of a foreign country, although definitions and terminology differ across legal systems.


== Lexicology ==
The term "alien" is derived from the Latin alienus. The Latin later came to mean a stranger, a foreigner, or someone not related by blood. Similar terms to "alien" in this context include foreigner and lander.


=== Categories ===
Different countries around the world use varying terms for foreign nationals, also called non-citizens. Those who have relinquished their citizenship and/or nationality may or not be an alien in the host country.  The following are general categories:

permanent resident — any immigrant who has been lawfully admitted into a nation and granted the legal right to remain therein as a permanent resident, including registered refugees, in accord with the nation's immigration laws.
temporary resident — any foreign national who has been lawfully granted permission by the government to drive, fly, travel, lodge, reside, study or work for a specific number of years and then apply for an extension or leave the country before such permission expires.
nonresident alien — any foreign national, such as a travel visa holder or a foreign tourist, who is lawfully within a nation but whose legal domicile is in another nation.
alien enemy (or enemy alien) — any foreign national of any country that is at war with the host country.
undocumented alien (or removable alien) — any person who has been found to be "subject to removal" by an Immigration Judge, generally because of one of three reasons: (a) violating the terms of the visa, (b) being convicted of specified crimes, or (c) entering the territory without formal authorization.


== Common law jurisdictions ==

An "alien" in English law denoted any person born outside of the monarch's dominions and who did not owe allegiance to the monarch. Aliens were not allowed to own land and were subject to different taxes to subjects. This idea was passed on in the Commonwealth to other common law jurisdictions.


=== Australia ===
In Australia, citizenship is defined in the Australian nationality law. Non-citizens in Australia are permanent residents, temporary residents, or "unlawful non-citizens". Most non-citizens (including those who lack citizenship documents) traveling to Australia must obtain a visa prior to travel. The only exceptions to the rule are holders of New Zealand passports and citizenship, who may apply for a visa on arrival according to the Trans-Tasman Travel Arrangement.
In 2020, in Love v Commonwealth, the High Court of Australia ruled that Aboriginal Australians (as defined in Mabo v Queensland (No 2)) cannot be considered aliens under the Constitution of Australia, regardless of whether they were born in Australia or hold Australian citizenship.


=== Canada ===
In Canada, the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act defines a foreign national as "a person who is not a Canadian citizen or a permanent resident, and includes a stateless person." The term "alien" is not used in federal statutes.


=== United Kingdom ===

In the United Kingdom, the British Nationality Act 1981 defines an alien as a person who is not a British citizen, a citizen of Ireland, a Commonwealth citizen, or a British protected person. The Aliens Act 1905, the British Nationality and Status of Aliens Act 1914 and the Aliens Restriction (Amendment) Act 1919 were all products of the turbulence in the early part of the 20th century.


=== United States ===

In the United States, the term "alien" is synonymous with foreign national. Under the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) of the United States, "[t]he term 'alien' means any person not a citizen or national of the United States." People born in American Samoa or on Swains Island are statutorily "non-citizen nationals." Others, such as natives of Palau and the Marshall Islands, are noncitizen "nonimmigrants without visas" for INA purposes.
Every refugee that is admitted to the United States under 8 U.S.C. § 1157 automatically becomes an "immigrant" and then a "special immigrant" after receiving a green card.

The usage of the term "alien" dates back to 1790, when it was used in the Naturalization Act and then 1798 when it was used in the Alien and Sedition Acts. The INA contains 22 occurences and a clear definition of the category of "alien lawfully admitted" and one occurrence of "illegal alien", with no explicit definition. The later is mentioned in a number of provisions under title 8 of the US code. Several provisions mention the term "unauthorized alien". "undocumented alien" or "undocumented person. According to PolitiFact, the term "illegal alien" scarcely occurs in federal law and is undefined or part of an introductory title or limited to apply to certain individuals convicted of felonies.” According to Jeff Baker of the Pepperdine School of Law, ‘alien’ may be a technical term of art, but ‘illegal alien’ is almost always pejorative in contemporary usage." The US Library of Congress replaced the term in 2021, adopting the subject headings "noncitizens" and "illegal immigration" in 2021. 
There are a multitude of unique and highly complex U.S. domestic tax laws and regulations affecting the U.S. tax residency of foreign nationals, both nonresident aliens and resident aliens, in addition to income tax and social security tax treaties and totalization agreements.
"Alienage", i.e., citizenship status, has been prohibited since 1989 in New York City from being considered for employment, under that city's Human Rights legislation.


== Other jurisdictions ==


=== Arab states ===

In the Gulf Cooperation Council (United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Oman, Bahrain, and Qatar), many non-natives have lived in the region since birth. However, these Arab states do not easily grant citizenship to non-natives. Most stateless Bedoon in Kuwait belong to indigenous northern tribes.


=== Europe ===
The European Parliament withdrew the term "alien" from documents relative to Eurodac, a European Union-wide biometric database that collects and maintains fingerprint records of non-EU/European Economic Area (EEA), adopting "third-country national or a stateless person".


== See also ==
Alien land laws
Alien Tort Statute
California Alien Land Law of 1913
Gaijin
Laowai
Persona non grata
Unaccompanied Alien Children


== Notes and references ==


== External links ==

Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
Biden seeks to replace 'alien' with less 'dehumanizing term' in immigration laws (NBC News, Jan. 22, 2021)
Aliens - International Law - Oxford Bibliographies (24 July 2013)
The rights of non-citizens, Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, 2006
Council of Europe Commission for Democracy through Law report on noncitizens and minority rights, 2007
D. C. Earnest Noncitizen Voting Rights: A Survey of an Emerging Democratic Norm, 2003
University of Minnesota Human Rights Center: Study Guide: The Rights of Non-Citizens, 2003
UK Aliens' registration cards on The National Archives' website..
In the context of globalization and the subsequent proliferation of free trade agreements (FTAs), legal scholars generally refer to the political strategy used by a sovereign state to leverage a trade agreement's substantive rules to counter behavior it deems unreasonable by its trading partners, as aggressive legalism.


== Development of aggressive legalism ==
Following World War II and the Bretton Woods Conference, the United States and the Allied Powers designed a new world economic order, partially emphasizing greater cooperative trade relationships. With the adoption of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) in 1946 and via its replacement by the World Trade Organization (WTO) in 1995, these countries developed a comprehensive legal framework, that reflected their common legal traditions, to facilitate these relationships, including a system to settle disputes that favored litigation.
Somewhat under GATT in the 1950s but specifically with the adoption of the WTO, these countries engaged increased trade with Asian countries, as they became signatories.   Initially, while the U.S. and the Allied Powers leveraged the agreement's respective legal frameworks and dispute-mechanisms including litigation to deal with disputes with their trading partners, many Asian countries choose not to. Instead, they avoided legal confrontation, in favor of bilateral negotiations to arrive at a settlement. Social-cultural disparities between each, concerning an inclination to litigate, are likely indicative of why.
However, in the 1980s and 1990s, under both GATT and WTO, many Asian countries began to utilize their legal frameworks to settle disputes.
In 2001, in Aggressive Legalism: The Rules of the WTO and Japan’s Emerging Trade Strategy, Saadia M. Pekkanen described the increasing tendency of the Japanese government's use of the World Trade Organization's (WTO) dispute settlement protocols to counter adverse acts by its trading partners as aggressive legalism. Aggressive legalism, she argued is “a conscious strategy where a substantive set of international legal rules can be made to serve as both ‘shield’ and ‘sword’ in trade disputes among sovereign states.”


== Modern aggressive legalism ==
In a policy primer for the United States Government, The Policymaker's Library wrote that the United States' influence with its Asian trading partners has waned and that an "emphasis on aggressive legalism" affords opportunities to reshape economic relationships going forward.


=== United States ===
The Korea–US Free Trade Agreement (KORUS), reflects a political strategy by both the United States and South Korea of aggressive legalism. That is, both countries agreed to envelope in the agreement binding legal rules to deal with lingering bilateral trade disputes.


=== Asia ===
Following the succession of GATT with the WTO in the 1980s and 1990s, many Asian countries, including China, Japan, and South Korea, shifted to a policy of aggressive legalism, evidenced by each's willingness to use the legal frameworks provided under both to directly engage bilateral trading disputes with their partners.


== References ==.
Constitutionalism is "a compound of ideas, attitudes, and patterns of behavior elaborating the principle that the authority of government derives from and is limited by a body of fundamental law".
Political organizations are constitutional to the extent that they "contain institutionalized mechanisms of power control for the protection of the interests and liberties of the citizenry, including those that may be in the minority". As described by political scientist and constitutional scholar David Fellman:

Constitutionalism is descriptive of a complicated concept, deeply embedded in historical experience, which subjects the officials who exercise governmental powers to the limitations of a higher law. Constitutionalism proclaims the desirability of the rule of law as opposed to rule by the arbitrary judgment or mere fiat of public officials ...  Throughout the literature dealing with modern public law and the foundations of statecraft the central element of the concept of constitutionalism is that in political society government officials are not free to do anything they please in any manner they choose; they are bound to observe both the limitations on power and the procedures which are set out in the supreme, constitutional law of the community. It may therefore be said that the touchstone of constitutionalism is the concept of limited government under a higher law.


== Definition ==
Constitutionalism has prescriptive and descriptive uses. Law professor Gerhard Casper captured this aspect of the term in noting, "Constitutionalism has both descriptive and prescriptive connotations. Used descriptively, it refers chiefly to the historical struggle for constitutional recognition of the people's right to 'consent' and certain other rights, freedoms, and privileges. Used prescriptively, its meaning incorporates those features of government seen as the essential elements of the... Constitution".


=== Descriptive ===
One example of constitutionalism's descriptive use is law professor Bernard Schwartz's five volume compilation of sources seeking to trace the origins of the U.S. Bill of Rights. Beginning with English antecedents going back to Magna Carta (1215), Schwartz explores the presence and development of ideas of individual freedoms and privileges through colonial charters and legal understandings. Then in carrying the story forward, he identifies revolutionary declarations and constitutions, documents and judicial decisions of the Confederation period and the formation of the federal Constitution. Finally, he turns to the debates over the federal Constitution's ratification that ultimately provided mounting pressure for a federal bill of rights. While hardly presenting a straight line, the account illustrates the historical struggle to recognize and enshrine constitutional rights and principles in a constitutional order. 


=== Prescriptive ===
In contrast to describing what constitutions are, a prescriptive approach addresses what a constitution should be. As presented by the Canadian philosopher Wil Waluchow, constitutionalism embodies

the idea ... that government can and should be legally limited in its powers, and that its authority depends on its observing these limitations. This idea brings with it a host of vexing questions of interest not only to legal scholars, but to anyone keen to explore the legal and philosophical foundations of the state.
One example of this prescriptive approach was a project of the National Municipal League to develop a model state constitution.


=== Constitutionalism vis-à-vis Constitution ===
The study of constitutions is not necessarily synonymous with the study of constitutionalism.
Legal historian Christian G. Fritz distinguishes between "constitutional questions", examining how the constitution was interpreted and applied to distribute power and authority as the new nation struggled with problems of war and peace, taxation and representation, and "questions of constitutionalism —how to identify the collective sovereign, what powers the sovereign possessed, and how one recognized when that sovereign acted." He noted that "questions of constitutionalism could not be answered by reference to given constitutional text or even judicial opinions" but were "open-ended questions drawing upon competing views".
A similar distinction was drawn by British constitutional scholar A.V. Dicey in assessing Britain's unwritten constitution. Dicey noted a difference between the "conventions of the constitution" and the "law of the constitution". The "essential distinction" between the two concepts was that the law of the constitution was made up of "rules enforced or recognised by the Courts", making up "a body of 'laws' in the proper sense of that term." In contrast, the conventions of the constitution consisted "of customs, practices, maxims, or precepts which are not enforced or recognised by the Courts" but "make up a body not of laws, but of constitutional or political ethics".


== Core features ==


=== Fundamental law and legitimacy of government ===
One of the most salient features of constitutionalism is that it describes and prescribes both the source and the limits of government power derived from fundamental law. William H. Hamilton has captured this dual aspect by noting that constitutionalism "is the name given to the trust which men repose in the power of words engrossed on parchment to keep a government in order."
Moreover, whether reflecting a descriptive or prescriptive focus, treatments of the concept of constitutionalism all deal with the legitimacy of government. One recent assessment of American constitutionalism, for example, notes that the idea of constitutionalism serves to define what it is that "grants and guides the legitimate exercise of government authority". Similarly, historian Gordon S. Wood described the most "advanced thinking" on the nature of constitutions wherein the constitution was conceived (according to Demophilis, who was possibly George Bryan) a "sett of fundamental rules by which even the supreme power of the state shall be governed." Ultimately, American constitutionalism came to rest on the collective sovereignty of the people, the source that legitimized American governments.


=== Civil rights and liberties ===
Constitutionalism is not simply about the power structure of society. It also asks for a strong protection of the interests of citizens, civil rights as well as civil liberties, for all, and has a close relation with democracy. The United Kingdom has several centuries-old laws limiting governmental power (for example, the Bill of Rights 1689). Historically, there has been little political support for introducing a comprehensive written or codified constitution in the UK. However, several commentators and reformers have argued for a new British Bill of Rights to provide liberty, democracy and the rule of law with more effective constitutional protection.


== Criticisms ==

Legal scholar Jeremy Waldron contends that constitutionalism is often undemocratic:

Constitutions are not just about restraining and limiting power; they are about the empowerment of ordinary people in a democracy and allowing them to control the sources of law and harness the apparatus of government to their aspirations. That is the democratic view of constitutions, but it is not the constitutionalist view.... Of course, it is always possible to present an alternative to constitutionalism as an alternative form of constitutionalism: scholars talk of "popular constitutionalism" or "democratic constitutionalism."... But I think it is worth setting out a stark version of the antipathy between constitutionalism and democratic or popular self-government, if only because that will help us to measure more clearly the extent to which a new and mature theory of constitutional law takes proper account of the constitutional burden of ensuring that the people are not disenfranchised by the very document that is supposed to give them their power.
Libertarian political theorist Murray Rothbard criticized constitutionalism as being incapable of restraining governments and not protecting the rights of citizens from their governments:

It is true that, in the United States, at least, we have a constitution that imposes strict limits on some powers of government. But, as we have discovered in the past century, no constitution can interpret or enforce itself; it must be interpreted by men. And if the ultimate power to interpret a constitution is given to the government's own Supreme Court, then the inevitable tendency is for the Court to continue to place its imprimatur on ever-broader powers for its own government. Furthermore, the highly touted "checks and balances" and "separation of powers" in the American government are flimsy indeed, since in the final analysis all of these divisions are part of the same government and are governed by the same set of rulers.


== Constitutionalism by nations ==
Used descriptively, the concept of constitutionalism can refer chiefly to the historical struggle for constitutional recognition of the people's right to "consent" and certain other rights, freedoms, and privileges. On the other hand, the prescriptive approach to constitutionalism addresses what a constitution should be. Two observations might be offered about its prescriptive use:

Observation 1 (Assumption of constitutionalism)
There is often confusion in equating the presence of a written constitution with the conclusion that a state or polity is one based upon constitutionalism. As noted by David Fellman, constitutionalism "should not be taken to mean that if a state has a constitution, it is necessarily committed to the idea of constitutionalism. In a very real sense... every state may be said to have a constitution, since every state has institutions which are at the very least expected to be permanent, and every state has established ways of doing things". But even with a "formal written document labelled 'constitution' which includes the provisions customarily found in such a document, it does not follow that it is committed to constitutionalism...."
Observation 2 (Use of the word in rhetoric)
Often the word "constitutionalism" is used in a  rhetorical sense, as a political argument that equates the views of the speaker or writer with a preferred view of the constitution. For instance, University of Maryland Constitutional History Professor Herman Belz's critical assessment of expansive constitutional construction notes that "constitutionalism... ought to be recognized as a distinctive ideology and approach to political life.... Constitutionalism not only establishes the institutional and intellectual framework, but it also supplies much of the rhetorical currency with which political transactions are carried on." Similarly, Georgetown University Law Center Professor Louis Michael Seidman noted as well the confluence of political rhetoric with arguments supposedly rooted in constitutionalism. In assessing the "meaning that critical scholars attributed to constitutional law in the late twentieth century," Professor Seidman notes a "new order... characterized most prominently by extremely aggressive use of legal argument and rhetoric" and as a result "powerful legal actors are willing to advance arguments previously thought out-of-bounds.  They have, in short, used legal reasoning to do exactly what crits claim legal reasoning always does—put the lipstick of disinterested constitutionalism on the pig of raw politics."


=== United States ===


==== Descriptive ====
Constitutionalism of the United States has been defined as a complex of ideas, attitudes and patterns elaborating the principle that the authority of government derives from the people, and is limited by a body of fundamental law. These ideas, attitudes and patterns, according to one analyst, derive from "a dynamic political and historical process rather than from a static body of thought laid down in the eighteenth century".
In U.S. history, constitutionalism, in both its descriptive and prescriptive sense, has traditionally focused on the federal constitution. Indeed, a routine assumption of many scholars has been that understanding "American constitutionalism" necessarily entails the thought that went into the drafting of the federal constitution and the American experience with that constitution since its ratification in 1789.
There is a rich tradition of state constitutionalism that offers broader insight into constitutionalism in the United States. While state constitutions and the federal constitution operate differently as a function of federalism from the coexistence and interplay of governments at both a national and state level, they all rest on a shared assumption that their legitimacy comes from the sovereign authority of the people or popular sovereignty. This underlying premise, embraced by the American revolutionaries with the Declaration of Independence unites American constitutional tradition.
Both experience with state constitutions before and after the federal constitution as well as the emergence and operation of the latter reflect an ongoing struggle over the idea that all governments in America rested on the sovereignty of the people for their legitimacy.


==== Prescriptive ====
Starting with the proposition that "'Constitutionalism' refers to the position or practice that government be limited by a constitution, usually written," analysts take a variety of positions on what the constitution means. For instance, they describe the document as a document that may specify its relation to statutes, treaties, executive and judicial actions, and the constitutions or laws of regional jurisdictions. This prescriptive use of Constitutionalism is also concerned with the principles of constitutional design, which includes the principle that the field of public action be partitioned between delegated powers to the government and the rights of individuals, each of which is a restriction of the other, and that no powers be delegated that are beyond the competence of government.
Two notable Chief Justices of the United States who played an important role in the development of American constitutionalism are John Marshall and Earl Warren. John Marshall, the 4th Chief Justice, upheld the principle of judicial review in the 1803 landmark case Marbury v. Madison, whereby Supreme Court could strike down federal and state laws if they conflicted with the Constitution. By establishing the principle of judicial review, Marshall Court helped implement the ideology of separation of powers and cement the position of the American judiciary as an independent and co-equal branch of government. On the other hand, Earl Warren, the 14th Chief Justice, greatly extended civil rights and civil liberties of all Americans through a series of landmark rulings. The Warren Court started a liberal Constitutional Revolution by bringing "one man, one vote" to the United States, tearing apart racial segregation and state laws banning interracial marriage, extending the coverage of Bill of Rights, providing defendants' rights to an attorney and to silence (Miranda warning), and so on.


=== United Kingdom ===


==== Descriptive ====

The United Kingdom is perhaps the best instance of constitutionalism in a country that has an uncodified constitution. A variety of developments in 17th century England, including the Constitutional Monarchy and "the protracted struggle for power between King and Parliament was accompanied by an efflorescence of political ideas in which the concept of countervailing powers was clearly defined,"
led to a well-developed polity with multiple governmental and private institutions that counter the power of the state.


==== Prescriptive ====
Constitutionalist was also a label used by some independent candidates in UK general elections in the early 1920s. Most of the candidates were former Liberal Party members, and many of them joined the Conservative Party soon after being elected. The best known Constitutionalist candidate was Winston Churchill in the 1924 UK general election.


=== Japan ===
Since May 3, 1947, the sovereign state of Japan has maintained a unitary parliamentary constitutional monarchy with an Emperor and an elected legislature called the National Diet.


=== Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth ===


==== Descriptive ====
From the mid-sixteenth to the late eighteenth century, the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth utilized the liberum veto, a form of unanimity voting rule, in its parliamentary deliberations. The "principle of liberum veto played an important role in [the] emergence of the unique Polish form of constitutionalism." This constraint on the powers of the monarch were significant in making the "[r]ule of law, religious tolerance and limited constitutional government... the norm in Poland in times when the rest of Europe was being devastated by religious hatred and despotism."


==== Prescriptive ====
The Constitution of May 3, 1791, which historian Norman Davies calls "the first constitution of its kind in Europe", was in effect for only a year. It was designed to redress longstanding political defects of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth and its traditional system of "Golden Liberty". The Constitution introduced political equality between townspeople and nobility (szlachta) and placed the peasants under the protection of the government, thus mitigating the worst abuses of serfdom.


=== Dominican Republic ===
After the democratically elected government of president Juan Bosch in the Dominican Republic was deposed, the Constitutionalist movement was born in the country. As opposed to said movement, the Anti-constitutionalist movement was also born. Bosch had to depart to Puerto Rico after he was deposed. His first leader was Colonel Rafael Tomás Fernández Domínguez, and he wanted Bosch to come back to power once again. Colonel Fernández Domínguez was exiled to Puerto Rico where Bosch was. The Constitutionalists had a new leader: Colonel Francisco Alberto Caamaño Deñó.


=== Islamic states ===
The scope and limits of constitutionalism in Muslim countries have attracted growing interest in recent years. Authors such as Ann E. Mayer define Islamic constitutionalism as "constitutionalism that is in some form based on Islamic principles, as opposed to constitutionalism that has developed in countries that happen to be Muslim but that has not been informed by distinctively Islamic principles". However, the concrete meaning of the notion remains contested among Muslim as well as Western scholars. Influential thinkers like Mohammad Hashim Kamali and Khaled Abou El Fadl, but also younger ones like Asifa Quraishi and Nadirsyah Hosen combine classic Islamic law with modern constitutionalism. The constitutional changes initiated by the Arab Spring movement have already brought into reality many new hybrid models of Islamic constitutionalism.


== See also ==
Classical liberalism
Constitutional liberalism
Constitution Party (disambiguation)
Constitutional law
Constitutionalism in the United States
Digital constitutionalism
Judicial interpretation
Libertarianism
Natural and legal rights
Philosophy of law
Rule according to higher law
Rule of law
Separation of powers
Social contract


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Gebeye, Berihun Adugna (2021). A Theory of African Constitutionalism. Oxford University Press.
Möller, Kai (2012). The Global Model of Constitutional Rights, ISBN 0199664609, ISBN 9780199664603 Oxford University Press.
Rosenfeld, Michel (1994). Constitutionalism, Identity, Difference, and Legitimacy: Theoretical Perspectives. Constitutional Conflicts S. Duke University Press. ISBN 978-0-8223-1516-2. Retrieved 2025-01-19.
Sandefur, Timothy (2008). "Constitutionalism". In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.). The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE; Cato Institute. pp. 100–103. doi:10.4135/9781412965811.n65. ISBN 978-1-4129-6580-4. LCCN 2008009151. OCLC 750831024.


== External links ==
Waluchow, Wil. "Constitutionalism". In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. ISSN 1095-5054. OCLC 429049174.
Philip P. Wiener, ed., "Dictionary of the History of Ideas: Studies of Selected Pivotal Ideas", (David Fellman, "Constitutionalism"), vol 1, pp. 485, 491–492 (1973–74)..
A Failure of Capitalism: The Crisis of '08 and the Descent into Depression is a 2009 book by legal scholar Richard Posner. The text was initially published on May 1, 2009, by Harvard University Press. Posner criticizes President George W. Bush and his administration's policies and the response to the fiscal crisis, and moves away from his past well-known advocacy of free-market capitalism.  The book has been primarily noted not for his criticism of progressive government policies, but rather his critique of laissez-faire capitalism and its ideologues.
The book has been received with generally good reviews from the press, including The New York Times, but the reception has not been universally positive.


== Synopsis ==
The primary argument of the book is that we have gone from a recession into a depression (the "D" word, as one author calls it) in 2009, and Posner suggests several possible short-term and long-term solutions to this fiscal crisis. His thesis is not that government, politicians, or even bankers primarily caused this depression, but rather that the capitalist system is to blame for its faults.
Some of the causes of the depression that Posner cites are the lack of enforceable usury laws, which would discourage risky loans, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) and central banks taking risks, securitization of mortgages, illiquidity and insolvency of the banking system, the housing bubble, blindness to warning signs of a crisis, and the preconceptions of ideology.
Posner wraps up the book with a chapter containing several suggestions, including eventual re-regulation of the banking industry, but warns that "this is not the time" to do so—a long-term solution after the economy recovers—that can "wait calmer days." He also suggests putting off a reorganization of the Treasury and the Federal Reserve until a later time.  In the meanwhile, he writes, "piecemeal reforms may be feasible and helpful."  These include a halt on government marketing of home ownership, requiring banks and financial institutions to "disclose the full compensation of all senior executives", backloading of compensation, increasing marginal income tax rates on the highest incomes, and usury laws to discourage risky loans.


== Criticism of George W. Bush ==
The book is significant in Posner's criticism of President George W. Bush and his administration's policies and the response to the fiscal crisis.  Part of the shock is due to Posner's longtime "conservative" views.  Judge Posner was nominated to the Seventh Circuit by Ronald Reagan, but is "no party man."
Posner starts his criticism of Bush with a broad attack on his behavior in his final months as President:

The lame-duck president seemed uninterested and uninformed about economic matters and was unable to project an image of leadership and instead spent his final months in office in frequent trips abroad and in legacy-polishing while the domestic economy melted away.
Posner blames Bush for pushing policies, such as the "ownership society", a $10 trillion national debt and "the huge budget deficits run by the Bush administration", "prop[ping] up stock prices by keeping interest rates low," which were underlying causes of the crisis, as well as "Dithering" in late 2008.  By the ownership society, Posner referred to the American Dream Down Payment Act of 2003 and other laws that made ownership easier.
Posner points out that Bush's proposed privatization of Social Security would have made the depression even more harmful.  Posner states that one of the "lessons learned" is that the "blurred" line between "the government and the private sector ... in the Bush Administration" contributed to a lack of insight into the underlying problems.  Even more so, "the emphatically pro-business philosophy of the Bush administration made the SEC too trusting of the securities industry."  The bottom line is that "there might not have been a depression had it not been for the Bush administration's mismanagement of the economy."


== Criticism of capitalism and mainstream economists ==
Posner, famous for his advocacy of free markets, turns on free-market capitalism in this book: "the financial crisis is indeed a crisis of capitalism rather than a failure of government."  Posner explicitly states that he has changed his mind, that in the words of economist Robert Lucas, "that macroeconomics in this original sense has succeeded."  Posner states that:

What Bernanke and Greenspan and the academy can be blamed for is overconfidence in their understanding of how to prevent a depression and, as a result, a failure to attend to warning signs and a lack of preparedness.
Posner points out that one of the causes of the depression was "blindness to warning signs" of a crisis.  A few people had warned of problems, including analyst Meredith Whitney, investment advisers like Gary Shilling, Peter Schiff, and Marc Faber, and economists Stephen Roach, Robert Shiller, and Nouriel Roubini, and Brooksley Born, but they were ignored.  He asserts that the "depression is a failure of capitalism".
This is the second and most powerful shock.  The New York Times points out that:

It comes as something of a surprise that Posner, a doyen of the market-oriented law-and-economics movement, should deliver a roundhouse punch to the proposition that markets are self-correcting. It might also seem odd that a federal appellate judge (and University of Chicago law lecturer) would be among the first out of the gate with a comprehensive book on the financial crisis — if, that is, the judge were any other judge. But Posner is the late Daniel Patrick Moynihan’s successor as the country’s most omnivorous and independent-minded public intellectual.


== Spreading the blame: critiques of Bill Clinton, Barack Obama, et al. ==
Posner also assigns part of the blame for the recession to the administration of Bill Clinton. He says they were to blame for pushing policies that created the housing bubble. The training and experience of several Clinton advisors, notably Robert Rubin, were tilted towards Wall Street, which he found to be ultimately dangerous. Likewise, Alan Greenspan, Clinton's appointee as chairman of the Federal Reserve, gets special blame for pushing low interest rates, which increased stock prices and led, in turn, to the bubbles in banking, stocks, and housing.
Posner sweeps a wide swath in assigning portions of the blame for causing the underlying recession to a variety of factors and persons. He praises the use of specific deterrence in shaming debtors, which, in his mind, has not been used enough recently. He faults the concept of limited liability for increasing risk. He points out the harmful focus on short-term profits at the expenses of long-term stability. Bad credit was, in Posner's words, given a "so what?" attitude.
Clinton and the Democratic leadership in Congress encouraged home ownership by people who had bad credit and should have, in Posner's view, remained tenants. Competition in the banking industry led to deregulation in Clinton's administration, and enactment of the Gramm–Leach–Bliley Act, which increased risk to the system. Posner is not alone in criticizing the Gramm–Leach–Bliley Act; some economists, including Nobel laureate Joseph Stiglitz also believe it led to the 2008 financial crisis. Encouraging the practice of "sweeps" by large investors (removing money from demand deposits into money market funds overnight) exacerbated the problem.
Preconceptions and ideology held by both sides of the spectrum, argues the book, prevented novel challenges to changing fiscal realities. Macroeconomics has not made use of chaos theory, and thus says Posner, the signal-to-noise ratio prevented a clear analysis and even created "blindness" and "misinformation" for policy analysts.
Posner went on the record against how Barack Obama's administration's Keynesian stimulus in the ARRA "could have been better designed," and specifically demurs against some of Obama's statements:

But the harassment of business over compensation policies, and the impending federal takeover of General Motors, are negatives: they increase the uncertainty of the business environment, which dampens the incentive to invest, and shift the balance between government and business in the management of economic activity too far in favour of the government.
Nonetheless, Posner points out that what is rational for an individual corporation may not be rational for the industry as a whole.


== Reception ==
Reviewing for The New York Times, Jonathan Rauch wrote that:

By the last page, not a single lazy generalization has survived Posner’s merciless scrutiny, not one populist cliché remains standing. “A Failure of Capitalism” clears away whole forests of cant but leaves readers at a loss as to where to go from here. In other words, it is only a starting point — but an indispensable one.
The Huffington Post gave a long review, noting with a bit of schadenfreude that Posner had changed his views.  Michael Casey, in a  review published in the Irish Times, writes "Blaming the system is a cop-out.... Posner’s approach is far too deterministic", and further calls the book "[a]n incomplete analysis of a floundering social system."
In The Washington Post, Paul M. Barrett, an assistant managing editor of Business Week,  writes that Posner seems to spread the blame too much, denigrates mere stupidity and "greed" as causes, and lacks "constructive proposals for reform...."  Barrett points out how notable this book is, which is that "his critique is bracing, all the more so because it comes from a right-leaning thinker normally hostile to the ministrations of government bureaucrats."
The New York Review of Books said that "it is at best a partial success; it gets some things right and some things wrong, and the items on both sides of the ledger are important."  In the Review, Nobel Prize–winning economist Robert Solow praises the author quite faintly:

I have to say that the prose in this book often reads as if it were written, or maybe dictated, in a great hurry. There is some unnecessary repetition, and many paragraphs spend more time than they should on digressions that seem to have occurred to the author in mid-thought. If not exactly chiseled, the prose is nevertheless lively, readable, and plainspoken. The haste may have been justified by the pace of the events he aims to describe and explain. Posner has an extraordinarily sharp mind, and what I take to be a lawyerly skill in argument. But I also have to say that, in some respects, his grasp of economic ideas is precarious.
Solow's review itself was notable to some degree, according to Brad DeLong, who critiqued Posner's logic along the way:

Yet while Posner insists on saving the appearance of individual rationality, he is willing to jettison the Chicago School's conclusion that markets are everywhere and always perfect. As Robert Solow observed: "If I had written that, it would not be news. From Richard Posner, it is." Abandoning the conclusion of market perfection opens the door to the idea that government needs to properly check, balance, and regulate markets in order to help them function as well as possible. But clinging to the assumption of individual rationality forces Posner’s view of what regulation is appropriate into a very awkward straightjacket.
In an interview with The Economist, Posner was forced to defend his use of the term "depression" and his move "to the centre..."
Forbes magazine printed the preface of the book as a measure of its importance.
In January 2010, The New Yorker revisited A Failure of Capitalism, noting that by September 2009, Posner had become a confirmed Keynesian: "As acts of betrayal go, this was roughly akin to Johnny Damon's shaving off his beard, forsaking the Red Sox Nation, and joining the Yankees."


== See also ==
Criticism of capitalism
American Dream Down Payment Act of 2003


== Notes ==


== References ==
2009. A Failure of Capitalism: The Crisis of '08 and the Descent into Depression, ISBN 978-0-674-03514-0


== External links ==
Chinese edition of A Failure of Capitalism
Official Publication webpage at Harvard University website
Official Becker-Posner blog
Roberts, Russ (November 16, 2009). "Posner on the Financial Crisis". EconTalk. Library of Economics and Liberty..
The Hart–Fuller debate is an exchange between the American law professor Lon L. Fuller and his English counterpart H. L. A. Hart, published in the Harvard Law Review in 1958 on morality and law, which demonstrated the divide between the positivist and natural law philosophy. Hart took the positivist view in arguing that morality and law were separate. Fuller's reply argued for morality as the source of law's binding power.


== Nazi informer case ==
The debate discusses the verdict rendered by a decision of a post-war West German court on the following case:

"In 1944, defendant, desiring to get rid of her husband, reported to the authorities derogatory remarks he has made about Hitler while home on leave from the German army. Defendant wife having testified against him, the husband was sentenced to death by a military tribunal apparently pursuant to statutes making it illegal to assert or repeat any statements inimical to the welfare of the Third Reich. . . . However, after serving some time in prison, the husband was sent to the front. Following the defeat of the Nazi regime, the wife, as well as the judge who had sentenced her husband, was indicted under § 289 of the German Criminal Code of 1871, for the unlawful deprivation of another's liberty ('rechtswidrige Freiheitsberaubung'). On appeal to a German Court of last resort in criminal cases, held, that the sentencing judge should be acquitted, but that the wife is guilty since she utilised out of free choice a Nazi 'law' which is contrary 'to the sound conscience and sense of justice of all decent human beings' about the death or imprisonment of her husband."


== Philosophy ==


=== Context ===
Jurisprudence refers to analysis of the philosophy of law. Within jurisprudence there are multiple schools of thought, but the Hart–Fuller debate concerns just legal positivism and natural-law theory. Legal positivists believe that "so long as [an] unjust law is a valid law, one has a legal obligation to obey it". Positivists disregard the morality of valid laws and treat law as the sole source of authority on what is valid. Natural-law theorists see a direct connection between validity and morality. 


=== Initial essays ===

In Hart's initial paper, "Positivism and the Separation of Law and Morals", he establishes that the "Command Theory" perspective of Legal Positivism, which was stated by John Austin and holds that laws are commands to human beings, is inadequate as it does not accurately represent the nature of laws. Hart then defends the problem of "the core and the penumbra", which arises when a law's meaning is up for interpretation. The problem of the penumbra arises when the definition of a word in a law is inadequate in deciding the outcome of a case, leading to human interpretation of the law as the deciding factor. An example is a law that refers to a vehicle, which would clearly mean automobile in a core case, but in the penumbra case, the vehicle in question is an airplane, or motorcycle. Hart suggested that rather than interpreting the law with respect to subjective moral values on the given word, the law should be interpreted with respect to the law's purpose. Finally, Hart approaches the criticism of separation of law and morals in an environment of extreme evil law. He discusses the views of Radbruch and Kelsen on the Nazi regime's extremely corrupt legal system. From this discussion, he moves to analyzing the Nazi informer case. In this analysis, he disagrees with the reasoning for the court's ruling, and presents two alternatives: let the woman go unpunished, which he acknowledges is not morally correct, or punish her, and admit that it would set a dangerous precedent of retrospective law. Hart says that these two choices are both evil, which shows that hiding the morality of law is no solution.
In Fuller's response to "Positivism and the Separation of Law and Morals", titled "Positivism and Fidelity to Law: A Reply to Professor Hart", he criticizes Hart's failure to acknowledge the morality involved in the creation of law, and rejects his suggestion to interpret an entire law's objective rather than the individual words' meanings. Fuller says that the type of respect we give to human laws must be different from the respect we give a scientific law. For a law to deserve our respect, it must "represent some general direction human effort that we can understand and describe", and the principle of the law must be unconditionally valid.
In the first section, "The Definition of Law", Fuller breaks down the difference of opinion between Austin, Gray, Bentham, and Holmes, all positivists whom Hart defended. Fuller says that the positivist claim that however law is defined, it is different from morals, is useless. He then says that Hart's thesis is incomplete due to the useless idea he referenced, and that for it to be complete, he would have to define law in a way that "will make meaningful the obligation of fidelity to law".
In the next section, "The Definition of Morality", Fuller likens those who agree with Hart to people building defense for a village, knowing whom they want to protect, but not whom they are protecting them from. The thing they are trying to protect is the integrity of the concept of law, and their defense is a precise definition of law, but the attackers are what their definitions do not apply to. Fuller interprets Hart's examples of the many degrees of "what ought to be" that are immoral, concluding that Hart is reminding positivists that the program that they adopt may come with undesirable moral consequences. Fuller agrees with this point, and follows up with the following observations and questions:

Fuller observes that Hart assumes that evil objectives have the same coherence and logic as good objectives, and he disagrees with this, holding that coherence and goodness have more correlation that coherence and evil. He then states his belief that when someone explains their decisions, the decisions will move toward goodness. Finally, he rejects the idea that a legal system will over time work itself toward goodness case by case, arguing that it will instead entrench itself in unjust behavior.
Fuller questions the idea that the decline of the separation between law and morality would allow immoral values to be ingrained in the justice system, asking what the protection against this risk would be. He then says that the answer is not in the works of Austin, Gray, Holmes, and Hart, as they break the problem into a state of simplicity that ignores the true dangers.
Fuller hypothesizes a situation in which a judge aims to pursue a goal that most citizens would view as morally wrong, and asks whether the judge would be likely to make their decision based on a higher moral principle or aim to keep the interpretation consistent with existing laws and explain the decision in a way that aligns with the laws.
Fuller hypothesizes a situation in which he and Hart are in a country where their beliefs are the minority, and they believe that the majority's beliefs are evil. He says they would worry that laws would be manipulated to operate against their beliefs, but doubts that they would worry that someone would challenge those laws, appealing to the majority evil beliefs. He says that even in the most oppressive institutions there is a reluctance to codify extremely evil laws, and that it is clear that the reluctance stems from a tendency to associate law with easily justifiable morals.
Fuller says that in populations where the judicial process functions effectively, it is very unlikely that immoral law will be integrated. He defends this by giving the example of commercial law in Britain adopting a "law-is-law" formalism, going against the work in the field by Lord Mansfield. At this time, this situation grew to be a large problem as many commercial cases were taken to arbitration. Fuller says the reason for this shift toward arbitration is that arbitrators are willing to offer a more flexible process that considers the needs of the situation and industry more. At the end, Fuller says that even though Hart rejects "formalism", he believes that Hart's theory leans in the direction of formalism.
Fuller references the Pope's 1949 edict to Roman Catholic jurists not to pass sentences based on laws the church sees as unjust, saying that this is an instance of a bias that often influences how one perceives a subject. He says that this is a conflict between two different kinds of law, and that in such a situation, it is difficult to have a meaningful exchange on the topic, which may affect readers of Hart's essay.
In Fuller's third section, "The Moral Foundations of a Legal Order", he begins by agreeing with Hart's analysis of the command theory. He then says he predicted that Hart would acknowledge the role of morals in law-making and critiques Hart for not acknowledging the relationship. This brings him to analyzing Austin's Lectures V and VI on Jurisprudence, bringing up the inconsistencies in Austin's theories that could have easily brought him to abandon his command theory. Fuller then asks how the words "fundamental" and "essential" could be defined given Hart's idea of fundamental rules specifying the essential legislative process. He acknowledges that Kelsen's theory had an answer to this, but it is achieved by simplifying reality so much that it can be absorbed by positivism. Fuller says that written constitutions are vital in legal systems, and should be provisionally accepted as good law.
In Fuller's fifth section, "The Problem of Restoring Respect for Law and Justice After the Collapse of a Regime That Respected Neither", he looks at the Nazi informer case. Fuller believed none of the Nazi laws were valid, as the entire regime was evil and the law-making process lacked internal morality.


=== The Morality of Law ===
Fuller denied the core claim of legal positivism that there is no necessary connection between law and morality. According to Fuller, certain moral standards, which he calls "principles of legality," are built into the very concept of law, so that nothing counts as genuine law that fails to meet these standards. In virtue of these principles of legality, the law has an inner morality that imposes a minimal morality of fairness. Some laws, he admits, may be so wicked or unjust that they should not be obeyed. But even in these cases, he argues, there are positive features of the law that impose a defensible moral duty to obey them.
According to Fuller, all purported legal rules must meet eight minimal conditions in order to count as genuine laws. The rules must be (1) sufficiently general, (2) publicly promulgated, (3) prospective (i.e., applicable only to future behavior, not past), (4) at least minimally clear and intelligible, (5) free of contradictions, (6) relatively constant, so that they don't continuously change from day to day, (7) possible to obey, and (8) administered in a way that does not wildly diverge from their obvious or apparent meaning. These are Fuller's "principles of legality." Together, he argues, they guarantee that all law will embody certain moral standards of respect, fairness, and predictability that constitute important aspects of the rule of law.
Following the two essays, Fuller presented his argument more fully in his book, The Morality of Law, with a story about an imaginary king named Rex who attempts to rule but finds he is unable to do so in any meaningful way when any of these conditions are not met. Fuller contends that the purpose of law is to subject "human conduct to the governance of rules". If any of the eight principles is flagrantly lacking in a system of governance, the system will not be a legal one. The more closely a system is able to adhere to them, the nearer it will be to the rule-of-law ideal, though in reality all systems must make compromises and will fall short of perfect ideals of clarity, consistency, stability, and so forth.
In a review of The Morality of Law, Hart criticises Fuller's work, saying that these principles are merely ones of means-ends efficiency; it is inappropriate, he says, to call them a morality. Employing Fuller's eight principles of legality, one could just as well have an inner morality of poisoning as an inner morality of law, which Hart claims is absurd. In this phase of the argument, the positions of the disputants are transposed. Fuller proposes principles that would easily fit into a positivistic account of law and Hart points out that Fuller's principles could easily accommodate an immoral morality.


== See also ==
Hart–Dworkin debate
Hart-Devlin debate
Legal positivism
Natural law


== References ==

Hart, H. L. A. (1958). "Positivism and the Separation of Law and Morals". Harvard Law Review. 71 (4): 593–629. doi:10.2307/1338225. JSTOR 1338225.
Fuller, Lon L. (1958). "Positivism and Fidelity to Law — A Reply to Professor Hart". Harvard Law Review. 71 (4): 630–672. doi:10.2307/1338226. JSTOR 1338226.


== External links ==
Jan Komárek: Ještě ke konferenci k padesátinám debaty mezi HLA Hartem a Lonem Fullerem (in Czech)
Aakash Singh Rathore, "Video lecture on the Hart-Fuller Debate": [1].
Law's Empire is a 1986 text in legal philosophy by Ronald Dworkin, in which the author continues his criticism of the philosophy of legal positivism as promoted by H. L. A. Hart during the middle to late 20th century. The book introduces the concept of "law as integrity". Dworkin creates Judge Hercules as an idealized version of a jurist with extraordinary legal skills who is able to challenge various predominating schools of legal interpretation and legal hermeneutics prominent throughout the 20th century. Judge Hercules is eventually challenged by Judge Hermes, another idealized version of a jurist who is affected by an affinity to respecting historical legal meaning arguments which do not affect Judge Hercules in the same manner. Judge Hermes' theory of legal interpretation is found by Dworkin in the end to be inferior to the approach of Judge Hercules.


== Background ==
Much of the twentieth century in legal philosophy has been characterized by the confrontation of legal positivism with natural law theory as being among the most prominent legal theories seen in the century. One major proponent of the Anglo-American version of legal positivism was H. L. A. Hart, a professor at Oxford University, who was a teacher of Dworkin's and with whom eventually Dworkin would come to strongly disagree. To challenge the prevailing schools of legal interpretation and legal philosophy in the late twentieth century, Dworkin invented the personage of Judge Hercules to represent a version of legal philosophy which he saw as effectively answering many of the shortcomings he had come to identify with Hart and other legal schools prominent in his time.
Dworkin's approach in the book is to present his argument in ten chapters with one summary chapter added at the end of the book titled, "Law Beyond Law". The book is original in its format compared to conventional approaches to academic studies in the law by introducing the personage of Judge Hercules early in the text to answer many of the legal theories which Dworkin wishes to discuss as to their being insufficient to meet the requirements of late 20th century jurisprudence. In Dworkin's perspective, the prevailing climate of legal theory at the end of the 20th century was understood by him as being represented by the deficiencies of many competing and contradictory legal theories being presented by the legal academy. The ten chapters of the book build their logical argument sequentially and in growing complexity of exposition where each chapter is dependent upon the logical demonstrations made in previous chapters in order to establish the rationale and comprehension at work in the mind of the legal personage represented by Judge Hercules.


== Summary ==
Dworkin concisely states his primary concern in the preface of this volume concerning his approach to the philosophy of law: "We are subjects of law's empire, liegemen to its methods and ideals, bound in spirit while we debate what we must therefore do." The "empire" of the law is expansive for Dworkin and includes not only the domain of jurisprudence but extends fully into the domain of politics and sociology, including the philosophical domain of morals, ethics and even aesthetics as these affect the lives of all individuals of society.


=== Chapter One: What is Law? ===
In this chapter, Dworkin tells his readers that there are three types of law with which he is primarily concerned. These three areas of law are outlined as (a) Conventionalism, (b) Pragmatism (semantic theory), and (c) Law as integrity. Dworkin shall make a primary point of defending Law as integrity throughout the subsequent chapters of his text.


=== Chapter Two: Interpretive Concepts ===
Dworkin introduced his principle of the "semantic sting" of the semantic philosophy of law. He develops and distinguishes between two forms of skepticism to present his arguments differentiating between "internal skepticism" and "external skepticism", for use in subsequent chapters.


=== Chapter Three: Jurisprudence Revisited ===
Dworkin informs his readers that the concept of law is the theory of what forms the ground of law. The "concept of law" was used by H. L. A. Hart as the title for an approach to law strongly oriented to Anglo-American reading of positive law to which Dworkin would find insufficient for dealing with issues of jurisprudence encountered throughout the 20th century.


=== Chapter Four: Conventionalism ===
In this chapter, Dworkin begins his three-part, three-tier assessment of law with his criticism of Conventionalism. He differentiated Conventionalism as falling into two different kinds, which are insufficient, in the end, to the needs of contemporary jurisprudence at the end of the 20th century leading to the start of the 21st century. Dworkin ends the chapter asserting the failure of Conventionalism.


=== Chapter Five: Pragmatism and Personification ===
Dworkin rejects pragmatism here as insufficient to the adjudication requirements and legislative principles that he sees as prevailing at the end of the twentieth century. Dworkin begins to stress that contemporary jurisprudence in his view needs to hold in high esteem the values of justice as integrity, fairness, and due process.


=== Chapter Six: Integrity ===
For Dworkin, "Justice is a matter of outcomes: a political decision causes injustice, however fair its procedures that produced it, when it denies people some resource, liberty, or opportunity that the best theories of justice entitle them to have." For Dworkin, the answerability of jurisprudence to political theory and political obligations is central. Political ideals are presented as operating from a base of moral concerns that influence what is legislated as law.


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Allard, Julie. Dworkin et Kant: Réflexions sur le judgement. Bruxelles: Editions de l'ULB, 2001.
Brown, Alexander. Ronald Dworkin's Theory of Equality: Domestic and Global Perspectives. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009.
Benjamin Brown, From Principles to Rules and from Musar to Halakhah - The Hafetz Hayim's Rulings on Libel and Gossip
Burke, John J.A. The Political Foundation of Law: The Need for Theory with Practical Value. San Francisco: Austin & Winfield, 1992.
Burley, Justine, ed. Dworkin and His Critics. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 2004.
Cohen, Marshall, ed. Ronald Dworkin and Contemporary Jurisprudence. London: Duckworth, 1984.
Gaffney, Paul. Ronald Dworkin on Law as Integrity: Rights as Principles of Adjudication. Lewiston, New York: Mellen University Press, 1996.
Guest, Stephen. Ronald Dworkin (Jurists: Profiles in Legal Theory). Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2012.
Hershovitz, Scott, ed. Exploring Law's Empire: The Jurisprudence of Ronald Dworkin. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006.
Hunt, Alan, ed. Reading Dworkin Critically. New York: Berg, 1992.
Ripstein, Arthur, ed. Ronald Dworkin (Contemporary Philosophers in Focus). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007.
Wesche, Stefen and Zanetti, Véronique, eds. Dworkin: Un débat. Paris: Ousia, 2000.


== External links ==
NYU Law Faculty profile
UCL Faculty of Laws profile Archived 2013-06-15 at the Wayback Machine
Ronald Dworkin obituary by The Guardian
New York Review of Books archive
"Ronald Dworkin – Mr Justice", The Times Literary Supplement, 5 December 2007
"Interpretation and Coherence in Legal Reasoning" at the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
"Interpretivist Theories of Law" at the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
Ronald Dworkin International Balzan Prize Foundation
Law's Empire at IMDb
Appearances on C-SPAN.
Man-made law is law that is made by humans, usually considered in opposition to concepts like natural law or divine law.
The European and American conception of man-made law has changed radically in the period from the Middle Ages to the present day. In the Thomistic view dominant in the Medieval period, man-made law is the lowest form of law, as a determinatio of natural law or divine positive law. In the view dominant in the modern period, man-made law is thought of as primary because it is man-made. The Soviet Union went further, not recognizing any such thing as divine or natural law. In several Islamic countries, man-made law is still considered to be subordinate to divine law.


== Philosophical concepts ==


=== In Hegelianism ===
Professor Heinz Mohnhaupt of the Max Planck Institute for European History of Law relates man-made law to Hegel's concept of Rechtsgesetze or "Laws of Right", which Hegel placed in opposition to the Naturgesetz or laws of nature. In the Hegelian view, according to Mohnhaupt, man made law is Rechtsgesetze, or at least a subset thereof. Its characteristics are that it is "not absolute", and is created by human beings "above all" for the regulation of their actions and behaviour (but also for the ordering of things). It "has to be generally known" and "has to take into account [both] its anthropological determination and [...] its chronological determination". Man-made law is fluid, changing over time in order to adapt to changing real-world circumstances.


=== In the writing of Thomas Aquinas ===

Thomas Aquinas expounded the concept of Human Law, a distinct form of law alongside Natural Law and Eternal Law, in Summa Theologica. Thomas asserted the primacy of natural law over man-made law, stating that where it "is at variance with natural law it will not be a law, but spoilt law" (ST, I–II q. 95 a. 2). The result of any such conflict is that the man-made law does "not oblige in the court of conscience" (ST, I–II q. 95 a. 4), since human law is a determinatio of divine or natural law, and a lower law cannot contradict a higher law. Natural law theorists and others have thusly challenged many man-made laws over the years, on the grounds that they conflict with what the challengers assert to be natural, or divine, laws.


==== Lex humana versus lex posita ====

Thomas Aquinas himself conflated man-made law (lex humana) and positive law (lex posita or ius positiva). However, there is a subtle distinction between them. Positive law regards law from the position of its legitimacy. Positive law is law by the will of whoever made it, and thus there can equally be divine positive law as there is man-made positive law. (More literally translated, lex posita is posited rather than positive law.)  In the Summa contra Gentiles Thomas himself writes of divine positive law where he says "Si autem lex sit divinitus posita, auctoritate divina dispensatio fieri potest (If the law be divinely given, dispensation can be granted by divine authority)" and "Lex autem a Deo posita est (But the Law was established by God)".  Martin Luther also acknowledged the idea of divine positive law, as did Juan de Torquemada.
The Thomistic concept of man-made law, by contrast, regards law from a different angle. It treats it from the position of its origins. Lex humana or sometimes lex humanitus posita (as is the case throughout ST, q. 95), but sometimes rather lex ab hominibus inventa (as is the case in ST, q. 91.3), is law made by man, rather than made by the divine (lex divina). What is important about lex humana is not that it is posited by someone, but that the someone who posits it is human rather than divine.


== Historical change: from lowest rank to supreme law ==
The European and American conception of man-made law has changed radically in the period from the Middle Ages to the present day. In the Thomist view of the Middle Ages, man-made law was the lowest form of law. Above it were the lex naturalis, the lex divina, and the lex aeterna. Man-made law only had authority in as much as it expressed and concurred with higher laws.
Over the centuries, this idea has been turned on its head. Rather than being a lesser law because it is made by man rather than by the divine, modern conceptions of man-made law rank it as fundamental and supreme law because it is man-made, thanks to the notion of the sovereignty of the people that saw expression in events such as the American Revolution and French Revolution of the 18th century.
Legal theory in the Soviet Union went further, not recognizing any such thing as divine or natural law, and considering the state to be sovereign. Only man-made law, as made by the state, existed according to Marxist legal theory.
Although laws higher than the man-made law of the sovereign people are not formally recognized in the legal theories of countries such as the United States, the Thomist idea of man-made law being subordinate to divine law is still espoused by many people in those countries. For example: Martin Luther King Jr., in his Letter from Birmingham Jail cited Thomas Aquinas in his ways to know that a law is unjust:

"A just law is a man made code that squares with the moral law or the law of God. An unjust law is a code that is out of harmony with the moral law. To put it in the terms of St. Thomas Aquinas: An unjust law is a human law that is not rooted in eternal law and natural law."
In several Islamic countries, man-made law is still, in 20th and 21st century legal theory, considered to be subordinate to divine law, in the form of the sharia. In that legal theory, the sovereign power is Allah, not the people, and God-made law takes precedence over man-made law. (The full legal position of sharia is complex, varies from country to country, and is considered differently by various groups. For a wider discussion see the sharia article.)


== See also ==
Popular sovereignty
Positive law
Render unto Caesar


== References ==


=== Notes ===


=== Sources used ===.
Positive laws (Latin: ius positum) are human-made laws that oblige or specify an action. Positive law also describes the establishment of specific rights for an individual or group. Etymologically, the name derives from the verb to posit.
The concept of positive law is distinct from natural law, which comprises inherent rights, conferred not by act of legislation but by "God, nature, or reason". Positive law is also described as the law that applies at a certain time (present or past) and at a certain place, consisting of statutory law, and case law as far as it is binding.  More specifically, positive law may be characterized as "law actually and specifically enacted or adopted by proper authority for the government of an organized jural society."


== Lex humana versus lex posita ==

Thomas Aquinas conflated man-made law (lex humana) and positive law (lex posita or ius positivum).  However, there is a subtle distinction between them. Whereas human-made law regards law from the position of its origins (i.e. who it was that posited it), positive law regards law from the position of its legitimacy. Positive law is law by the will of whoever made it, and thus there can equally be divine positive law as there is man-made positive law. Positive Law theory stems from the powers that have enacted it. This type of law is necessary as it is manmade or enacted by the state to protect the rights of the individuals, the governed, to resolve civil disputes and lastly to maintain order and safety in the society. More literally translated, lex posita is posited rather than positive law. In the Summa contra Gentiles Thomas himself writes of divine positive law where he says "Si autem lex sit divinitus posita, auctoritate divina dispensatio fieri potest (if the law be divinely given, dispensation can be granted by divine authority)" and "Lex autem a Deo posita est (But the Law was established by God)".  Martin Luther also acknowledged the idea of divine positive law, as did Juan de Torquemada.
Thomas Mackenzie divided the law into four parts, with two types of positive law: divine positive law, natural law, the positive law of independent states, and the law of nations.  The first, divine positive law, "concerns the duties of religion" and is derived from revelation.  He contrasted it with divine natural law, which is "recognized by reason alone, without the aid of revelation".  The third, the positive law of independent states, is the law posited by "the supreme power in the state". It is, in other words, man-made positive law.  The fourth, the law of nations, regulates "independent states in their intercourse with each other".
Thomas Aquinas has little difficulty with the idea of both divine positive law and human positive law, since he places no requirements upon the person who posits law that exclude either humans or the divine.  However, for other philosophers the idea of both divine and human positive law has proven to be a stumbling block.   Thomas Hobbes and John Austin both espoused the notion of an ultimate sovereign. Where Thomism (and indeed Mackenzie) divided sovereignty into the spiritual (God) and the temporal (Mackenzie's "supreme power in the state"), both Hobbes and Austin sought a single, undivided, sovereign as the ultimate source of the law. The problem that this causes is that a temporal sovereign cannot exist if humans are subject to a divine positive law, but if divine positive law does not apply to all humans then God cannot be sovereign either. Hobbes and Austin's answer to this is to deny the existence of divine positive law, and to invest sovereignty in humans, who are, however, subject to divine natural law. The temporal authority is sovereign, and responsible for translating divine natural law into human positive law.
James Bernard Murphy  explains: "although our philosophers often seek to use the term positive to demarcate specifically human law, the term and concept are not well suited to do so.  All of divine law is positive in source, and much of it is positive in content...."


== Legal positivism ==

This term is also sometimes used to refer to the legal philosophy legal positivism, as distinct from the schools of natural law and legal realism.
Various philosophers have put forward theories contrasting the value of positive law and natural law. The normative theory of law, as put forth by the Brno school, gave pre-eminence to positive law because of its rational nature. Classical liberal and libertarian philosophers usually favor natural law over legal positivism. Positive law, to French philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau, was freedom from internal obstacles. Among the foremost proponents of legal positivism in the twentieth century were Hans Kelsen, both in his European years prior to 1940 and in his American years until his death in 1973, and the British philosopher H. L. A. Hart.


== See also ==

Legal naturalism
Man-made law
Natural law
Natural person in French law
François Gény (1861–1959), French jurist who introduced notion of "free scientific research" in positive law.


== Notes ==


== References ==.
A Theory of Legal Order (Teoria dell'Ordinamento Giuridico) is a book of the Italian jurist Norberto Bobbio about one of the ontological elements of foundations of law — the juridical order.


== Importance ==
Seen by scholars as an important work in understanding of a conceptual constructivist approach of the scientific way of thinking law in the new era of the jurisprudence of values, Bobbio's book faces this challenge in five chapters.


== Chapters ==
Concept of law; going from the juridical norm to the juridical order.
Unity of legal order;sources of law; the grundnorm; law and force.
Cohesiveness of the legal order; solution of conflicts between norms.
Completeness of legal order; the problem of gaps of law; analogy.
Relationships between different legal orders, in different countries or in the same country in different times; different legal orders in the same State.


== Criticism ==
"It's in the first chapter of the book, which could be a possible introduction, that the renowned jusphilosopher opted for not making. It is the connexion of this book, that study the complex of norms, with his former work, A Theory of Judicial Norms, that analyzed isolatedly the norm; and then both constitute his integer general theory of law."
"A Theory of Legal Order is an attempt to solve some problems that the theory of the norm hadn't managed to solve or even had answer unsatisfatorily, as, for instance, the questions of the completeness and conflicts between norms. Bobbio declares expressly that his work can be considered a continuation or complement of Kelsen's work, specially his General Theory of Law and State."
"In this work, the italian thinker analyzes no more the norm isolatedly, but the relationship between them inside an order. The author emphasizes the formal aspects of the unity, the cohesiveness and completess of law as a closed logical system, with the clear intention to survey the law with the objective criteria, sine qua non to rise them to a scientific level, through the juridical speech."


== Bibliography ==
Bobbio, Norberto.Teoria dell'ordinamento Giuridico. Torino:G. Giapichelli, 1960, ISBN 8834801857


== See also ==
jurisprudence of values
natural law
juridical system
rule of law


== References ==.
Treatise on Law is Thomas Aquinas' major work of legal philosophy. It forms questions 90–108 of the Prima Secundæ ("First [Part] of the Second [Part]") of the Summa Theologiæ, Aquinas' masterwork of Scholastic philosophical theology. Along with Aristotelianism, it forms the basis not only for the legal theory of Catholic canon law, but provides a model for natural law theories generally.


== Aquinas' notion of law ==
Aquinas defines a law as "an ordinance of reason for the common good, made by him who has care of the community, and promulgated."
Law is an ordinance of reason because it must be reasonable or based in reason and not merely in the will of the legislator. It is for the common good because the end or telos of law is the good of the community it binds, and not merely the good of the lawmaker or a special interest group. It is made by the proper authority who has "care of the community", and not arbitrarily imposed by outsiders. It is promulgated so that the law can be known.
He says:

Thus from the four preceding articles [of Question 90], the definition of law may be gathered; and it is nothing else than an ordinance of reason for the common good, made by him who has care of the community, and promulgated.
Strictly speaking, this is a definition of human law. The term "law" as used by Aquinas is equivocal, meaning that the primary meaning of law is "human law", but other, analogous concepts are expressed with the same term.


== Kinds of law ==

The Treatise on Law deals with Aquinas view’s on the objective ethical aspect of human decision-making. Aquinas presents a question and then puts each question into article raising specific questions he has. The first three questions are broken down in four topics concerning the essence of law, the effects of law, and the eternal law.
	 The first question (Question 90 of the larger Summa) is on the essence of law. Aquinas breaks the question down into four articles. The first article is on law's relation to reason. Aquinas believes that reason is the first thing human acts upon; “the source in any kind of thing is the measure and rule of that kind of thing…and so we conclude that law belongs to reason.” The second is on law's relation to the common good. He states that we cannot find common good without reason; it guides us to common happiness through law. The third article is concerned with whether any person's reason is enough to make laws. The fourth article is concerned with whether promulgation is essential to law. Promulgation is important so that the law can achieve force. By the end of the fourth article Aquinas comes up with his definition on law, “Law is an ordination of reason for the common good by one who has care for the community, and promulgated.”
	Question 91 is on the different kinds of law. Aquinas establishes four types of laws: eternal law, natural law, human law, and divine law. He states that eternal law, or God's providence, "rules the world… his reason evidently governs the entire community in the universe.” Aquinas believes that eternal law is all God’s doing. Natural law is the participation in the eternal law by rational creatures. Natural law allows us to decide between good and evil. Next we have Human Law; particular applications of law resulting by reason. “Human law originally sprang from nature.” The last is Divine law which is important because “it belongs to any law to be directed to the common good at its end.” These laws all go together and the relationship must be presented to comprehend them individually.
	Question 92 is the effects of laws. The first article asks "Is the Effect of Law to Make Human Beings Good?" Aquinas feels in order for law to make people good that law needs to guide people to their right virtue. “Therefore, since virtue makes those possessing it good, the proper effect of law is consequently to make its subject good, either absolutely or in some respect.” The second article of Question 92 is "Whether the acts of law are suitably assigned?" This article focuses on what acts consist of; namely, “commanding, forbidding, permitting, and punishing.” Aquinas believes that some human acts are good and some are evil.


=== Natural law ===

Natural law or the law of nature refers to normative properties that are inherent by virtue of human nature and universally cognizable through human reason. Historically, natural law refers to the use of reason to analyze both social and personal human nature to deduce binding rules of moral behavior. The law of nature, being determined by nature, is universal.


=== Eternal law ===
	Question 93 focuses on the Eternal as a whole. Aquinas is asking, is the eternal law the supreme plan in God? Aquinas argues whether or not if the eternal law is a plan of God. He says “God made each thing with its own nature. Therefore, the eternal law is not the same as divine plan.” (93.1) Augustine contradicts this idea by stating “the eternal law is the supreme plan that we should always obey.” Aquinas believes that the eternal law “is simply the plan of divine wisdom that directs all the actions and movements of created things.” (93.1) He says that God is above all else. That he creates everything in the universe. Human beings participate in eternal law in two ways: by action and by cognition. “The virtuous are completely subjects to the eternal law, as they always act in accord with.” Aquinas believes people who are truthful act according to the eternal law.


=== Human law ===

For Aquinas, human law is only valid if it conforms to natural law. If a law is unjust, then it is not actually a law, but a "perversion of law".


== Layout ==

The Treatise on Law (as part of the Summa Theologica) is divided into Articles (or broad topics) and Questions (or specific topics). The Questions each argue for a single thesis and defend it against objections. The division is as follows:
1. IN GENERAL

Q. 90: Of the Essence of Law (the rationality, end, cause, and promulgation of law)
Q. 91: Of the Various Kinds of Law (eternal, natural, human, divine, sin laws)
Q. 92: Of the Effects of Law
2. IN PARTICULAR

Q. 93: Of the Eternal Law
Q. 94: Of the Natural Law
Q. 95: Of Human Law
Q. 96: Of the Power of Human Law
Q. 97: Of Change in Laws
Q. 98: Of the Old Law
Q. 99: Of the Precepts of the Old Law
Q. 100: Of the Moral Precepts of the Old Law
Q. 101: Of the Ceremonial Precepts in Themselves
Q. 102: Of the Causes of the Ceremonial Precepts
Q. 103: Of the Duration of the Ceremonial Precepts
Q. 104: Of the Judicial Precepts
Q. 105: Of the Reason for the Judicial Precepts
Q. 106: Of the Law of the Gospel, Called the New Law, Considered in Itself
Q. 107: Of the New Law as Compared with the Old
Q. 108: Of Those Things That Are Contained in the New Law


== Legacy ==
William S. Brewbaker III has called it "perhaps the most famous of metaphysical legal texts”, while Robert M. Hutchins declared it “that greatest of all books on the philosophy of law”.


== See also ==
Thomas Aquinas
Christian views on the Old Covenant
Determinatio
Natural law
Philosophy of law
Philosophy, theology, and fundamental theory of Catholic canon law


== References ==


=== Bibliography ===
Aquinas, St. Thomas. Treatise on Law (Summa Theologica, Questions 90–97): With a New Introduction by Ralph McInerny, University of Notre Dame. (Washington, D.C.: Gateway Editions, Regnery Publishing, Inc. ©1956; 2001 printing).
Brewbaker, William S., III. Thomas Aquinas and the Metaphysics of Law (Alabama Law Review, Vol. 58 [2007], pg. 575); U of Alabama Public Law Research Paper No. 898941; Social Science Research Network: http://ssrn.com/abstract=898941. Accessed 28 March 2016.
Häring, Bernard, C.SS.R. The Law of Christ, Vol. I. Translated by Edwin G. Kaiser, C.PP.S. (Westminster, Maryland: The Newman Press ©1961, Second Printing November 1961).
Hutchins, Robert M. Aquinas Lecture 1949: St. Thomas and the World State (Milwaukee: Marquette University Press, 1949)..
An admission to practice law is occupational licensing required to practice law. In jurisdictions with two types of lawyer, as with barristers and solicitors, barristers must gain admission to the bar whereas for solicitors there are distinct practising certificates.
Becoming a lawyer is a widely varied process around the world. Common to all jurisdictions are requirements of age and competence; some jurisdictions also require documentation of citizenship or immigration status. However, the most varied requirements are those surrounding the preparation for the license, whether it includes obtaining a law degree, passing an exam, or serving in an apprenticeship. In English, admission is also called a law license. Basic requirements vary from country to country, as described below.
In some jurisdictions, after admission the lawyer needs to maintain a current practising certificate to be permitted to offer services to the public.


== Africa ==
The African Union comprises all 55 countries on the Continent of Africa. However, the qualifications for each nation can vary widely between them, with foreign educated lawyers having the most difficulty in obtaining residency.


=== Algeria ===
Those wishing to obtain a law degree must have Algerian nationality, be at least 23 years old, possess at least a bachelor's degree in law or equivalent degree in Islamic law, have a certificate of competency for the legal profession, and enjoy full political and civil rights without any convictions for a crime of dishonesty.


=== Angola ===
Angolan nationals and foreigners who wish to practice law must complete a law degree from an Angolan university and then take the National Exam for Admission to Advocacy. The regulations that establish that citizens admitted to the study of individuals accept foreign countries, on an equal basis, Angolan graduates. The Order of Attorneys of Angola is an organization of lawyers and responsible for the regulation of the legal profession in the country.


=== Botswana ===
Botswana requires a Bachelor of Laws degree to practice law. The Bachelor of Laws degree is earned through a five-year undergraduate program, with the fifth year as an internship. After completing a Bachelor of Laws program, applicants must complete a period of practical legal training and pass an admissions examination.


=== Egypt ===
To earn a law license, applicants must have Egyptian nationality, full civil capacity, not have any disciplinary findings against them, and be of good conduct and reputation. They are required to earn a law degree from an Egyptian university or a degree from a foreign university which is considered equivalent under Egyptian law, pass a medical examination to ensure fitness for the practice of the profession, and pay the registration fees and annual subscriptions required by law. After an applicant obtains a law degree, he or she must then undertake two years of practical training as a trainee lawyer and plead a minimum of 25 cases. Following the completion of the training period, the applicant must obtain the recommendation of the president of the lowest court and members of the local bar association to be admitted as a lawyer.


=== Ethiopia ===
A law license requires a diploma in law from a legally recognized educational institution. Ethiopian law schools offer undergraduate (LLB) and postgraduate (Juris Doctor) degrees in law. Students must complete a college preparatory program before acceptance to an LLB program. Those with an undergraduate degree (BA or BSC) in another field may be admitted to a three-year Juris Doctor program. All undergraduate students must complete the Law School Exit Examination to graduate. After earning a law degree, graduates must pass an exam for the relevant law license. The Regions of Ethiopia and the Ethiopian federal government all issue their own licenses for the practice of law.


=== Gabon ===
Gabon requires candidates to hold a law degree and complete a one-year internship under the supervision of a lawyer who has been licensed to practice law for at least five years. After completing the internship, the candidate must then petition the President of the Bar Association for a second one-year internship. At the end of the second internship, the candidate may petition the Bar Council to be enrolled as a lawyer.


=== Ghana ===
The General Legal Council is responsible for issuing licenses to practice law. Applicants must be of good character and have satisfactorily completed a course in law which meets its requirements at a school of law or other place of instruction it recognizes, or be qualified in practicing law in a country with a sufficiently analogous legal system. They must also practice for at least six months in the chambers of a lawyer who has been working in the profession for not less than seven years. Law licenses must be renewed annually. Those admitted to practice law in Ghana become members of the Ghana Bar Association.


=== Kenya ===


==== Governance ====
Legal practice in Kenya is governed by the Advocates Act, Chapter 16 of the Laws of Kenya. Only lawyers admitted to the Bar, known as Advocates of the High Court of Kenya, have the right of audience before Kenyan courts. To be an advocate, (which is concurrent with being a member of the Law Society of Kenya) one must first complete a law degree from a recognised university in Kenya or any other Commonwealth country, then attend the Kenya School of Law for a postgraduate Diploma in Legal Practice for training in more practical legal subjects such as conveyancing and evidence, and complete a mandatory six-month articles of pupillage under a lawyer of five years' standing.


==== Petition ====
Upon completion of the requisite academic and practical training, one must 'petition' the chief justice of the judiciary for admission to the bar by filing the requisite documents, including the petition in a prescribed format under the Advocates Act and an accompanying affidavit, a certificate of completion of pupillage and two certificates of moral fitness by practising lawyers of five years' standing, one of which must be from the petitioner's supervisor in chambers (referred to as 'pupil master'), and pay a fee.
The petition is addressed to both the registrar of the High Court on behalf of the chief justice and the secretary/CEO of the Law Society of Kenya, and upon approval by the Council of the Law Society, one is 'called to the bar'. The call is made in open court by taking an oath before the chief justice, who pronounces the admission. Usually, several lawyers are admitted to the bar at the same session.


==== Practice renewal ====
An annual fee for a 'practising certificate' must be paid to the Law Society of Kenya, although the certificate is issued by the Court Registrar. Non-payment renders one ineligible to appear before courts. Lawyers who do not wish to appear before courts need not take out a certificate, but in practice most lawyers do so as it is generally required by most employers, since only advocates can sign any documents in such capacity.
Advocates who wish to administer oaths—usually in affidavit format—must apply to the Chief Justice to be appointed Commissioners for Oaths, whereas those who wish to perform functions similar to notaries public in the United Kingdom must have been advocates for five years, and formally apply to be a notary public to the Chief Justice through the Court Registrar. To appear before the Supreme Court, one must be an advocate of seven years' standing.


=== Madagascar ===
To become an advocate (advocat), an individual must obtain a master's degree in law or equivalent degree and a Certificate of Aptitude for the Legal Profession, after which three years of further legal training, which can be extended by another two years, are required. Lawyers must re-register annually.


=== Morocco ===
To be registered as an advocate, an individual must be a Moroccan national or national of a country which has an agreement with Morocco which grants nationals of both countries reciprocal rights to practice law, be at least 21 years of age, enjoy full civil capacity, possess a bachelor's degree in law from a Moroccan law school or equivalent certificate from a recognized university, obtain a certificate of eligibility to practice law, have no convictions, never have been declared bankrupt, and not have been linked to the management of public institutions for a certain amount of time. Applicants must then pass the bar exam conducted by the Ministry of Justice and practice as a trainee lawyer for two years.


=== Namibia ===
Namibia has a detailed act that fully delineates the requisites to be a Legal Practitioner. Aspiring lawyers must hold a law degree from the University of Namibia or equivalent qualification from a university outside the country recognized by the Namibian government, obtain a certificate from the Board of Legal Education stating that the trainee lawyer has undergone practical legal training, and pass the Legal Practitioners' Qualifying Examination.


=== Niger ===
Admission to the Niger Bar requires a master's degree in law, passing the entry exam, completing a Certificate of Professional Practice and a one-year internship, or a two-year internship for those who do not have a Certificate of Professional Practice. At the end of the internship, the trainee lawyer is given a certificate of completion after their supervisor gives a reasoned opinion, and is eligible to register for the Niger Bar.


=== Nigeria ===
One has to complete a five-year LLB program in an accredited university in Nigeria or abroad, then a compulsory one-year program (bar 2) at the Nigerian Law School. International students do a preliminary course (bar 1) before doing the compulsory one-year program. During the law school program, students do compulsory court attachment and chamber attachment before graduation. After obtaining a law degree, aspiring lawyers must pass the examination at the Nigerian Law School. Those who pass are then called to the Nigerian Bar by the Nigerian Body of Benchers and enroll as a legal practitioner before the Supreme Court of Nigeria.


=== Rwanda ===
Holders of a Rwandan law license must be nationals of Rwanda, hold at least a bachelor's degree in law or equivalent degree, have a certificate from the Institute of Legal Practice and Development or an equivalent, and pass the bar exam. Applicants must also not have been sentenced to a prison term equal to or exceeding six months.


=== South Africa ===
To be admitted to practice law in South Africa, one must complete a Bachelor of Laws (LLB) degree at a South African university and pass the Attorneys' Admission Exams. This is followed by two years of Practical Vocational Training under a Practical Vocational Training Contract (PVTC) with a law firm. Finally, the applicant must apply to the High Court for admission and register with the Legal Practice Council.


=== Sudan ===
Individuals who apply to become advocates in Sudan must possess Sudanese nationality, be at least 21 years of age and of good character, possess an LLB degree from a recognized educational institution, and pass the Legal Professing exam, which is managed by the Advocates Admissions Committee, unless granted an exemption from doing so. Successful applicants must complete a one-year traineeship, then pass an interview with the Bar Admission Committee before being admitted. Licenses must be renewed annually.


=== Tunisia ===
To practice as an advocate in Tunisia, individuals must be registered in the table of advocats. Registration requires a person to have held Tunisian nationality for at least five years, to be a resident of Tunisia, be between 20 and 50 years of age, have no criminal record, never to have been declared bankrupt, and have fulfilled all national service requirements. Candidates must hold a certificate of aptitude for the legal profession from the Higher Institute of the Legal Profession unless they hold the title of Professor of Law from a Tunisian or foreign university, in which case they may gain an exemption from this requirement. Newly qualified lawyers must spend a year as a trainee lawyer, during which time they can only plead before lower courts. After one year, they may apply to be fully certified as a lawyer.


=== Uganda ===
To be admitted as an advocate, an individual must be a Ugandan national or resident, possess a Bachelor of Laws degree from a Ugandan university or an educational institution from any other country with a common law legal system and recognized by the Law Council, and obtain a postgraduate diploma in legal practice from the Law Development Centre. Candidates must then apply to be recognized as lawyers by the Law Council, which will issue an advocate's license if satisfied that the applicant is eligible and is a fit and proper person to be an advocate. Advocate's licenses must be renewed annually.


=== Zimbabwe ===
To be admitted to practice law, one must complete an LLB degree from the University of Zimbabwe or Midlands State University, register with the Law Society of Zimbabwe and receive a practicing certificate, and be enrolled on the register of the Supreme Court of Zimbabwe. Practicing certificates from the Law Society of Zimbabwe must be renewed annually. Holders of degrees from outside Zimbabwe must have obtained them from designated institutions and take an exam.


== Americas ==
In U.S. English, admission to the bar is also commonly known as obtaining one's "law license" ("licence" in Canadian English).


=== Anguilla ===
Admission to practice in Anguilla is regulated by the Legal Profession Act 2016. To be admitted in Anguilla a person first needs to be admitted in either England & Wales, Scotland or Northern Ireland, or have received a Certificate of Legal Education from the Council of Legal Education of the West Indies. Further the applicant needs to be either (a) a Belonger of Anguilla, (b) resident in Anguilla, or (c) a citizen of certain specified Caribbean countries.


=== Argentina ===
In Argentina, prospective lawyers must complete an undergraduate law degree (Abogado, which lasts five to six years depending on the university), and then become a member of one of the jurisdictional associations.


=== Bahamas ===
Under the laws of the Bahamas, only a Bahamian national can normally be admitted as a lawyer. However, there is an exception for special admissions to allow senior barristers who have specialist expertise to be admitted to conduct a single case.


=== Bolivia ===
Bolivia requires candidates to complete a law degree at a Bolivian law school, which takes 9-10 semesters, and then submit a graduate certificate and certificate of good civil standing to the Ministry of Justice. There is no bar exam in Bolivia.


=== Brazil ===
Brazil requires an undergraduate law degree (Bachelor in law, in Portuguese Bacharelado em Direito, which lasts five years) and the passing of the bar examination.


=== British Virgin Islands ===
A person may be admitted as a barrister or solicitor in the British Virgin Islands either by being admitted as a lawyer in the United Kingdom, or by attending one of the three regional law schools (Hugh Wooding Law School, Norman Manley Law School or Eugene Dupuch Law School). In 2015 the British Virgin Islands passed the Legal Profession Act 2015. Although the new admission rules under the Act have not yet been brought into force, once it does so graduates from regional law schools will still be eligible for admission but will have to undertake a period of one years' pupillage; and lawyers from the United Kingdom will only be eligible for admission if they have five years' post-qualification experience. The new regime will also allow senior foreign lawyers to be admitted temporarily just for a single case.


=== Canada ===
Canadian applicants to the bar must obtain admission (referred to as the "call to the bar") to one of the provincial or territorial Law Societies in the various jurisdictions of Canada. All domestically trained lawyers must have a bachelor's degree in law LLB or Juris Doctor (JD) from a law school accredited by the provincial law society or the National Committee on Accreditation before being called to the bar. Admission requirements to law school vary between those of common law jurisdictions, which comprise all but one of Canada's provinces and territories, and the province of Quebec, which is a civil law jurisdiction. For common law schools, students must have already completed an undergraduate degree before being admitted to an LLB or JD programme, although this requirement can be waived in exceptional circumstances. For civil law schools, students must generally either have graduated from a general and vocational college (CEGEP), have a two-year college degree, or have completed at least a year of undergraduate education. Once students earn a law degree, they must typically pass examinations and/or a legal training program and serve in an apprenticeship as an articled clerk with a law firm for a certain amount of time.
The exact requirements vary among the different provinces and territories. All jurisdictions require a law degree and a certain period of time articling. Some require a bar exam or multiple exams, others require a bar admissions course in place of an exam, and others require both examinations and courses. For example, the Law Society of British Columbia requires that a student complete an undergraduate degree in any discipline and before studying for an undergraduate law degree (LL.B. and/or B.C.L., three to four years) or Juris Doctor (three years). The applicant must then pass two licensing examinations, the Barrister Licensing Examination and Solicitor Licensing Examination, then article with a law firm for nine to fifteen months depending on the jurisdiction and nature of the articling process. The Law Society of Ontario likewise requires law graduates to pass a Barrister Licensing Examination and Solicitor Licensing Examination, then requires that candidates complete ten months of articles supervised by a practising lawyer, or an alternative such as an eight-month Law Practise Program. The Law Society of Alberta, Law Society of Manitoba, and Law Society of Saskatchewan do not require an examination; they instead require candidates to pass the Practice Readiness Education Program (PREP) course administered by the Canadian Centre for Professional Legal Education as well as a one-year articling period. The Bar of Quebec requires a bar exam and a 6-month articling period. The Law Society of Yukon requires students to article for a year and during that time to attend the Bar Admissions Course and take the Yukon Statutes Exam. All provinces also have character and fitness requirements.


=== Cayman Islands ===
A person may be admitted as an attorney-at-law in the Cayman Islands by one of three routes. A newly qualified person may qualify by either holding a bachelor of laws degree from the Cayman Islands Law School or an equivalent institution or a non-law degree together with the Common Professional Examination/Graduate Diploma in Law, and then completing the 9-month Professional Practise Course ("PPC"), followed by eighteen months as an articled clerk within a law firm. Under the Legal Practitioners (Students) Regulations (2012 Revision) only Caymanians or persons that hold Cayman Status or as otherwise approved by the Cayman Islands Cabinet may undertake the PPC. Lawyers who are already qualified to practice in the United Kingdom, Jamaica or another approved Commonwealth jurisdiction may be admitted under the Legal Practitioners Law (2015 Revision) provided that they are in good standing in their jurisdiction of admission and can demonstrate residence in the Cayman Islands for at least a year (usually by holding a valid work permit for that period of time). Lastly, lawyers who are admitted in another jurisdiction and who only wish to be temporarily admitted in the Cayman Islands for the purposes of appearing in a single case (usually King’s Counsel from London) may be temporarily admitted. All attorneys are required to hold a current practicing certificate to practice law, but the Cayman Islands is slightly unusual that if an Attorney ceases to hold a practicing certificate for two years they are struck off the roll.


=== Chile ===
Chile requires a law degree (Licenciado en Ciencias Jurídicas: five years, and to pass a bar exam covering all civil and procedural law studied, which usually takes one or two years more). A six-month  apprenticeship is also required. Candidates are then sworn in as a lawyer in the Supreme Court.


=== Cuba ===
In Cuba, candidates must complete a law degree. Law school courses last five years and include several cycles of apprenticeships. After graduating, most students must sit the bar exam. Those with the highest grades may be admitted to practice law by writing an honors thesis rather than taking the bar exam. All graduates must also perform three years of social service.


=== Ecuador ===
Ecuador requires a law degree from a university in Ecuador recognized by the Secretary of Higher Education, Science, Technology and Innovation. Candidates must then complete a Pre-Professional Practice Program in a given public institution, totalling at least 500 hours of study. They must then register with the Lawyers' Forum of the Judicial Council. There is no bar exam in Ecuador.


=== Guatemala ===
To be admitted as a lawyer in Guatemala, it is necessary to hold a certificate of competence issued by the Supreme Court of Justice, which is available to those who are Guatemalan nationals and have obtained a law degree from a recognized university. Those practicing law must also register with the College of Attorneys and Notaries. There is no bar exam in Guatemala.


=== Mexico ===
Lawyers in Mexico are required to complete a law degree (Licenciado en Derecho, a five-year program), and obtain a practice certificate (cedula professional) from the Bureau of Professions of the Ministry of Education (Dirección General de Profesiones), which officially certifies the license by virtue of the law degree. There is no bar exam in Mexico.


=== Peru ===
Lawyers (Abogados) in Peru must be members of a local bar association, which requires an undergraduate law degree (Bachiller en Derecho, a six-year program) and a diploma (Titulo de Abogado), the latter requiring one year of apprenticeship and passing of the bar exam.


=== United States ===

In the United States, all states, territories, and the District of Columbia regulate and license the legal profession separately and maintain their own bar associations. While some other Common law countries maintain separate categories of lawyers in the form of barristers and solicitors, there is only one category of lawyer in the United States. The terms lawyer and attorney are used interchangeably. With varying exceptions, jurisdictions typically require that candidates complete a postgraduate law degree and pass the bar examination.
Most jurisdictions require applicants to complete a Juris Doctor degree from a law school approved by the American Bar Association (ABA). In the United States, all law degrees are postgraduate. Law schools require candidates to hold a bachelor's degree prior to commencing law studies. There are no requirements for any particular undergraduate degrees, and aspiring law students may complete a degree in any particular subject or in general studies. Formal pre-law programs exist but are not typically given special favor by law schools. A minority of states permit graduates of law schools not approved by the ABA to take their bar examination or will admit a graduate of such a school to their bar association provided that the candidate has been admitted to the bar of another state. The states of Alabama, California, Connecticut, Massachusetts, West Virginia, and Tennessee allow individuals to take the bar exam upon graduation from law schools approved by state bodies but not accredited by the ABA. Specifically in California, certain law schools "registered" with the Committee of Bar Examiners of the State Bar of California (CBE) are authorized to grant Juris Doctor degrees although they are not accredited by the ABA or CBE. Students at these schools must take and pass the First-Year Law Students' Examination (commonly referred to as the "baby bar") administered by the CBE, and may continue their studies to obtain their Juris Doctor degree upon passage of this exam.
The state of New York makes special provision for persons educated to degree-level in common law from overseas, with holders of bachelor degrees in law being qualified to take the bar exam and, upon passing, be admitted to the bar.
All jurisdictions require applicants to pass a moral character evaluation and to pass an ethics examination, which some states administer as part of their bar examinations. Most also require applicants to achieve a particular score on the Multistate Professional Responsibility Examination.
The states of Wisconsin and New Hampshire are the only jurisdictions to not unconditionally require law graduates to pass a bar exam for admission. Diploma privilege is available in Wisconsin for J.D. graduates of the state's two ABA-accredited law schools. LLM and SJD graduates of these law schools are not eligible for diploma privilege. New Hampshire's only law school has an alternative licensing program that allows a limited number of students who have completed certain curricula and a separate exam to bypass the regular bar examination. Most states and territories also allow admission on motion, in which licensed attorneys from different jurisdictions who have practiced for a certain period of time (typically three to seven years) may be admitted to practice law without taking a bar exam through a motion or application with the state supreme court, board of bar examiners, or bar association, typically accompanied by certificates of good standing from all other jurisdictions where they are admitted to practice and a background check demonstrating good moral character.
The states of California, Maine, New York, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, and West Virginia allow applicants to study under a judge or practicing attorney for an extended period of time rather than attending law school. This method is known as "reading law" or "reading the law". New York allows applicants who read law to take the bar exam, but only if they have at least one year of law school study. Maine allows students who completed two years of law school to serve an apprenticeship in lieu of completing their third year. California allows students who completed two years of college coursework, or the equivalent as demonstrated by examination, to meet the legal education requirement for the bar exam by studying law diligently in a lawyer's office or judge's chambers for not less than 864 hours over not less than four years. Hours spent as an employee of an attorney or judge are not counted as study. Very few people pursue these options.
The American legal system is unusual in that it has no formal apprenticeship or clinical training requirements prior to admission to the bar, with a few exceptions. Delaware requires that candidates for admission to the bar serve five months in a clerkship with a lawyer in the state. Vermont had a similar requirement but eliminated it in 2016. Washington requires, since 2005, that applicants must complete a minimum of four hours of approved pre-admission education. Some law schools have tried to rectify this lack of experience by requiring supervised "Public Service Requirements" of all graduates. States that encourage law students to undergo clinical training or perform public service in the form of pro bono representation may allow students to appear and practice in limited court settings under the supervision of an admitted attorney.


== Asia ==


=== Armenia ===
Candidates must obtain a law degree and gain a minimum of two years of legal working experience, which is often fulfilled by a legal internship. After completing these requirements, they may sit for the bar exam. Those who pass may apply for membership in the bar.


=== Azerbaijan ===
In order to practice law, candidates must complete higher legal education, have at least three years of work experience in a legal field or field of law in scientific and pedagogical educational institutions, pass an examination consisting of a written test and an interview by the Lawyers Qualification Commission, and go through training at the Justice Academy run by the Ministry of Justice.


=== Bangladesh ===
Practicing law requires admission to the Bangladesh Bar Council. In order to do so, candidates must be citizens of Bangladesh, be a minimum of 21 years old, and obtain a law degree. They must pass the Bar Council Examination to be allowed to practice law.


=== Bhutan ===
In Bhutan, only Bhutanese citizens are permitted to practice law; international lawyers and firms are not allowed to practice in the country. Lawyers practicing in Bhutan, known as Jabmi in Dzongkha, must pass the Bar exam conducted by the Bar Council of Bhutan. To be admitted to the Bar, a Jabmi must fulfill several criteria: be a Bhutanese citizen, be a person of integrity, good character, and reputation, not be of unsound mind or have a mental infirmity, not be adjudged bankrupt, not have been convicted of a criminal offense and sentenced to imprisonment, have legal qualifications recognized by the Jabmi Tshogdey of Bhutan, and have passed the Bar selection examinations.


=== Cambodia ===
Cambodia requires a Bachelor of Law or equivalent law degree, certificate of Lawyer's Professional Skill from the Center for the Training of the Legal Profession, and no misdemeanor or felony record, as well as no disciplinary sanction or administrative penalty. Unless granted an exemption, prospective lawyers must then spend a year as a trainee lawyer, either in a training program conducted by the Bar Association or by working as an associate in a law firm. Following the training period, the Bar Council will make a decision whether or not to register the prospective lawyer with the Bar Association based on whether or not the trainee fulfilled the requirements and a report on the trainee's supervising lawyer. If the Bar Council decides that the trainee does not have sufficient competence, it can order a period of additional training not to exceed one year. Applicants who satisfy the Bar Council that they are of sufficient competence are registered with the Bar Association and are allowed to practice law.


=== China ===
In China, one must first obtain a recognized law degree (a bachelor's, master's, or doctoral degree) or have at least three years of work experience in certain legal institutions. Those aspiring to be allowed to practice law must also have a record of good behavior. Applicants must then pass the National Unified Legal Professional Qualification Examination. They must also complete a one-year apprenticeship before being granted a license to practice law.


==== Hong Kong ====
The special administrative region of Hong Kong makes a distinction between barristers and solicitors. Admission to either profession requires a law degree (either the four-year LL.B. or the two-year Juris Doctor) and a Postgraduate Certificate in Laws (which requires nine months). The apprenticeship to become a barrister is only one year, while a solicitor must apprentice for two years.
Foreign lawyers (from any jurisdiction) may be admitted as solicitors by passing the Overseas Qualified Lawyers Examination and satisfying a three months residence requirement. Foreign lawyers may also be admitted as barristers by passing the Barristers Qualification Examination.


=== India ===
In India, prospective lawyers  must complete an undergraduate law degree after 12 years of schooling and obtain an honours law degree, (actually a double degree) where the course is a five-year course. The first undergraduate foundational and generic degree, (usually B.A.Law but in some cases Bachelor of General Laws/Bachelor of Socio-Legal Studies etc.) is awarded after three years of study, and the professional law degree called the LL.B. (honours) degree, which has a substantial component of practical training, is earned after two years of further legal studies.
Alternatively any graduate with a bachelor's degree in any subject (obtained after 15 years of education, i.e. after graduation), can enroll for a second graduate degree in law of a three-year course (LL.B. degree). The 5-year LL.B. (honours) degree and the 3-year LL.B. degree are the only qualifying professional degrees recognized for entering the legal profession in India.
Law graduates in India are not entitled to call themselves advocates and can not appear in courts even if they call themselves lawyers.
India requires all law graduates, intending to enter the profession of practising law as advocates, to first enroll themselves on the Roll of Advocates of any State Bar Council (regional authorities under the overall authority of the Bar Council of India) and to pass the All India Bar Examination (AIBE) conducted by the Bar Council of India which is the institution regulating the profession of legal practice. It is mandatory for all law school graduates to qualify in the All India Bar Examination, without which they cannot be admitted to practice in courts and may not refer to themselves as advocates. After being enrolled by one of the State Bar Councils and clearing the All India Bar Examination, a law graduate's name is entered on the Roll of Advocates maintained by their State Bar Council and is issued a Certificate of Practice. After this, they are entitled to call themselves advocates and can appear in court representing clients.
All advocates in India, irrespective of which State Bar Council they are registered to, have the right to practice in all High Courts and their Subordinate Courts and Tribunals throughout India under Section 30 of the Advocates Act. However, to practise Law before the Supreme Court of India, Advocates must first appear for and qualify in the Supreme Court Advocate on Record Examination conducted by the Supreme Court.


=== Indonesia ===
There is no distinction between barrister and solicitor in Indonesia. Instead, an admitted person to the bar to practice law is called an advocate (advokat), who is licensed to provide legal services both before or outside the court.
To be an Indonesian advocate, one needs to be appointed by Peradi (Indonesian Advocates Association) and take an oath in an open proceeding before the high court having a jurisdiction over the prospective advocate. As an advocate, one is allowed to practice law all over Indonesia.
Before appointed as an advocate, there are requirements which must be met which are listed under Article 3 paragraph 1 of the Indonesian Law No. 18 of 2003 on Advocate. The prospective advocate should be an Indonesian citizen, domiciled in Indonesia, is not a civil servant nor a state official, at least 25 years old, holds a bachelor's degree in law and has completed the special education for advocates arranged by Peradi, passed the bar exam organised by Peradi, has completed an internship in a law office for a continuous period of 2 years, has never been penalised for a criminal offense which is subject to an imprisonment of 5 years or more, and well behaved, honest, could act fairly and has a high integrity.


=== Iran ===
Iran requires an undergraduate law degree (LL.B., which is a four-year program). After obtaining a law degree, the candidate must pass the bar exam. The Bar Exam in Iran is administered by two different and completely separate bodies. One is the Bar Association of every province—all of which are under the auspices of the country's syndicate of the bars of the country. The other one is administered by the Judicial System of Iran subject to Article 187 of the country's economic, social and cultural development plan. The exam is highly competitive and only a certain number of top applicants are admitted annually.
After a candidate completes a law degree and passes the bar exam, they are admitted to the bar as a "Trainee at Law". After admission to the bar, an 18-month apprenticeship begins which is highly regulated under the auspices of Bar Syndicate Rules and supervision of an assigned First Degree Attorney. Trainees or apprentices must attend designated courts for designated weeks to hear cases and write case summaries. A logbook signed by the judge on the bench has to certify their weekly attendance. By the end of the eighteenth month, they are eligible to apply to take the Final Bar Exam by submitting their case summaries, the logbook and a research work pre-approved by the Bar. It is noteworthy, however, that during these 18 months, Trainees are eligible to have a limited practice of law under the supervision of their supervising Attorney. This practice does not include Supreme Court eligible cases and certain criminal and civil cases. Candidates will be tested on Civil law, Civil Procedure, Criminal law, Criminal Procedure, Commercial Law, Notary (including rules pertaining Official Documents, Land & Real Estate registrations and regulations etc.). Each exam takes two days, a day on oral examination in front of a judge or an attorney, and a day of essay examination, in which they will be tested on hypothetical cases submitted to them. Successful applicants will be honored with the title of "First Degree Attorney", after they take the oath and can practice in all courts of the country including the Supreme Court. Those who fail must redo the program in full or in part before re-taking the Final Bar Exam.


=== Israel ===
Israel requires an undergraduate law degree from an educational institution recognized by the Law Faculty of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. Candidates must then pass a series of examinations on eight separate areas of law. After these exams, the candidate must complete an apprenticeship in a law firm as an articled clerk for eighteen months, working at least 36 hours a week. After serving their articles, candidates must pass the final examinations on nine subjects of law and court procedure, which consist of a written examination followed by an oral examination before three judges. Those who pass are eligible for admittance to the Israel Bar Association. Residence in Israel is a precondition for admittance.
Lawyers moving to Israel from abroad without an Israeli law degree must have at least two years of practical legal experience as an attorney or judge in their country of origin. If an applicant does not have the required experience, the foreign law degree must be recognized by the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. The applicant must also complete a Hebrew proficiency exam followed by the battery of exams and internship requirements listed above. Those who have at least five years of practical legal experience abroad and began serving their articles within ten years of their arrival in Israel are exempt from the final examinations.


=== Japan ===

Japan requires the passing of the national bar exam, a 12-month training program which incorporates additional coursework and field training as apprentices to judges, prosecutors, and law offices, and passing the graduation examination of the training program. To sit for the bar exam, applicants must have the degree of juris doctor or have passed the preliminary bar exam. The training program is conducted by the Legal Research and Training Institute of the Supreme Court of Japan. During the program, future prosecutors and judges are handpicked and trained for the role.
In Japan, an attorney (Japanese: 弁護士) must be a member of one of the local bar associations which are organised into national bar association (Japanese: 日本弁護士連合会).


=== Jordan ===
The Jordanian Bar Association requires both academic, practical and oral exams for admission to the bar. The probationer must hold a bachelor's degree or equivalent in Law.
The Bar Association requires a minimum of two years of training under supervision of an Attorney. However, if a post-graduate degree in law is attained, a reduction to one year of training is possible. The Bar grants the probationer, at different stages of his training, special rights of audience to appear before specific courts.
The probationer may submit a written request, at any stage of his training, to be enrolled in the written exams that the Bar holds 4 times a year. If he/she attains an exam mark of (15/25) or higher, then the probationer will progress to the oral exam conducted by a legal committee elected from a combination of judges, professors and senior lawyers. If he/she passes the oral exam, then they are required to submit a research paper. Each probationer must research a legal subject, submit a written paper, and discuss his/her findings before the committee. If he/she passes, the probationer must undertake an oath before the Minister of Justice, the conclusion of which grants him entry to the Bar. The process requires, on average, around two-and-a-half years to satisfy the Bar Association's requirements to practice law. However, it should be mentioned that only Jordanians may petition the Bar Association to practice law.


=== Kazakhstan ===
Lawyers in Kazakhstan must complete an undergraduate law degree. The legal education system includes both law courses in secondary schools (colleges) and higher education institutions (universities, academies, institutes). After completing a degree, aspiring lawyers must then pass a special qualifying examination to enter the profession.


=== Lebanon ===
Applicants must be Lebanese citizens for at least ten years and between the ages of 20 and 65. They should possess full civil capacity and a four-year Lebanese Bachelor of Laws from recognized universities, alongside the Lebanese Baccalaureate Part II. High ethical standards are mandatory, including having a clean judicial record, demonstrating behavior that inspires trust and respect, and not being dismissed from public service or a profession for dishonorable reasons.
The journey begins with an entrance examination for one of the country’s two Bar Associations, followed by a comprehensive three-year internship under a registered practicing attorney-at-law. Candidates then undergo rigorous exit oral and written examinations, testing their legal knowledge and language proficiency, particularly in Arabic, and either French or English. The Bar Council meticulously scrutinizes the applications, extending the review period if necessary, to validate the candidates’ reputation and eligibility. Upon successful completion of these stages, and after taking the official oath and settling any associated fees, the individual can practice law in Lebanon, provided they maintain the stringent criteria set forth by the legal profession’s regulatory framework.


=== Malaysia ===
Malaysia requires advocates and solicitors to be admitted to the Malaysian Bar. The prerequisite is either a Bachelor of Laws (Hons) degree (an LL.B (Hons)., which requires four years of study) from the local law faculties or a call as a Barrister in the UK or a Certificate in Legal Practice, which is a post-graduate qualification on procedural law equivalent to a master's degree and taking approximately nine months to complete, and a nine-month pupillage. Advocates and Solicitors are entitled to appear before the courts and/or perform solicitors' work, as the legal profession in Malaysia is fused without any distinction between barristers and solicitors.
The East Malaysian states of Sabah and Sarawak have their own sets of criteria for admission to their own respective law societies.


=== Mongolia ===
All lawyers must be members of the Mongolian Bar Association (MBA). Prospective lawyers must graduate from a law school accredited by the MBA and undertake a two-year period of professional training, after which they become eligible to take the bar examination. Candidates who pass the bar examination must send a request for membership to the MBA together with the required documents. Upon examination and validation of the documents, the applicant is registered as a member and granted a license to practice law.


=== Nepal ===
Nepal requires lawyers to complete a bachelor's degree in law and then pass an exam conducted by the Nepal Bar Council to obtain a legal practitioner's license.


=== Pakistan ===
Lawyers in Pakistan are called Advocates.
To enjoy rights of audience in the Courts in Pakistan, a prospective lawyer/advocate must obtain a 5-year B.A. LL.B. degree or a Bachelor's or equivalent degree followed by a LL.B. of three years. The latter route is no longer offered and no admission at a Pakistani university on or after January 1, 2019, shall be recognized by the Pakistan Bar Council or a Provincial Bar Council for admission to the bar. The degree has to be obtained from a recognized Pakistani university or from a recognized university in a common law country. All legal education in Pakistan is taught in the English language. After the required academic qualifications a prospective lawyer/advocate must undertake six months training under a senior lawyer (High Courts Lawyer) (called Pupillage/ Apprenticeship/ Intern-ship /Training) at the conclusion of which, they have to take a Bar exam consisting of multiple choice question paper (or in some cases a professional exam) and an interview with a committee of lawyers presided by Judge of concerned High Court. After that the respective Provincial Bar Council may grant him or her the rights of audience in the lower courts (i.e. courts lower than the High Court).
An advocate enrolled with Provincial Bar Council can practice only in his province. He /she will earn right of audience in the High Courts after a further two years of practice in lower courts, at the end of which (in some Provincial Bar Council's) the advocate has to sit another professional exam and an interview with a judge of a High Court.
After a further 10 years' practice in the High Courts, the candidate has to sit another professional exam and an interview with a judge of the Supreme Court to be given the rights of audience in the Supreme Court of Pakistan.
The exams are usually conducted to ensure that the quality of lawyers being produced is maintained to a certain level. The interview is then another opportunity for a senior judge and members of the provincial Bar Council to meet the candidate and see if he or she is fit to be admitted as an advocate of the lower courts/ High Courts or the Supreme Court.


=== Philippines ===
To practice law in the Philippines, one must have fulfilled the non-academic and academic requirements.
For non-academic requirements, one must be a Filipino, be at least 21 years old, be a resident of the Philippines, and have the moral and other non-academic qualifications needed.
In terms of academic requirements, one must have obtained an undergraduate degree (with major, focus or concentration in any of the subjects of history, economics, political science, logic, English or Spanish), has obtained a Juris Doctor degree (or Bachelor of Laws before 2019) from a law school recognized by the Secretary of Education. 
They must have also taken and passed (75% general average, with no subject falling below 50%) the Bar Exam, taken the Attorney's Oath before the Supreme Court, signed the Roll of Attorneys, remain in good standing with the Integrated Bar of the Philippines, and continually participate in Mandatory Continuing Legal Education.


=== Saudi Arabia ===
The practice of law requires an applicant to hold a degree from a Sharia college, Bachelor of Law degree from a Saudi university, an equivalent of any of these degrees from abroad, or a postgraduate diploma in legal studies from the Saudi Institute of Public Administration. Three years of practical legal work experience are then required unless the applicant holds a master's degree in Sharia or law or is a graduate of a Sharia college with a postgraduate degree in law, in which case only one year of legal work experience is required. Those holding a doctorate in either of these fields are exempt from the work experience requirement entirely. Those who practice law must also be of good conduct and not have been subject to a Hudud or any other punishment which impugns integrity for the past five years, and must be residents of Saudi Arabia. To be allowed to practice law, applicants must fulfill the educational and work requirements, then sign a declaration confirming that they were not subjected to a Hudud or any other criminal penalty impugning their integrity within the past five years and are residents of the country.


=== Singapore ===

Persons seeking admission to the Singapore Bar must obtain an approved law degree through completing a course of study of at least three academic years leading to that degree as a full-time internal candidate from an approved university. The degree is typically an LL.B. or an LL.B. (honours), depending on the university, or a J.D. (from a Singaporean university or one of only four approved US universities). They are then required to sit for the Singapore Bar Examinations, which is divided into Part A (for overseas graduates from approved overseas universities only) and Part B (a five-month practical course, compulsory for both local and overseas graduates). They are further required to complete a one-year (six-month prior to 2024) Practice Training Contract before they can be called to the Bar as Advocates and Solicitors of the Supreme Court of Singapore. Advocates and Solicitors are entitled to appear before courts or perform solicitors' work, as the legal profession in Singapore is fused without any distinction between barristers and solicitors.
Exemptions from any of these requirements may be obtained from the Ministry of Law.


=== South Korea ===

In South Korea, one can be admitted to practice law by passing the exam called 변호사시험 (officially translated as "Bar Examination") which requires prior completion of three-year law school course with the degree of Juris Doctor. This law school system is similar to system of United States. However, before year 2018, there was a nation-wide system to train lawyers for 2 years, including judge, prosecutor and attorney at law. This old training institution was called as 사법연수원 (officially translated as "Judicial Research and Training Institute", JRTI)', which is now acting mainly as institution to train junior judges and court officials in South Korea. Entering JRTI required passing a special exam on jurisprudence. Its name was 사법시험 (officially translated as "Judicial Examination") which required taking a little part of course in LL.B. or any other equivalent degree.


=== Sri Lanka ===
Sri Lanka requires an attorney to be admitted and enrolled as an Attorney-at-Law of the Supreme Court of Sri Lanka to practice law. In order to become an attorney, candidates must graduate from the Sri Lanka Law College, which typically takes three years and involves three examinations. For those who possess a law degree from a foreign university recognized by the Council of Legal Education, the entrance exam may be waived. Candidates who have a bachelor's degree in law from the University of Colombo, Open University of Sri Lanka, University of Jaffna, and University of Peradeniya are exempt from all lectures and only need to take the final examination. Those qualified as a barrister in England and Wales, Scotland, and Ireland are exempt from most lectures. After graduation, candidates must then go through a practical training course and a six-month apprenticeship under an attorney of at least eight years before applying for membership in the Bar Association of Sri Lanka.


=== Taiwan ===
Taiwan requires an undergraduate law degree, which takes four years. Afterwards, students must pass the Attorney Qualification Examination. Graduates must then complete a six-month internship with certified institutions before receiving a license to practice law from the Ministry of Justice. Attorneys must join a bar association before being allowed to practice law.


=== Thailand ===
Under the Thailand Lawyers Act B.E. 2528 (1985), litigators (barristers) who practice before the courts in Thailand must obtain a "Lawyer's License" issued by the Lawyers Council of Thailand. Legal counsels (solicitors) who do not practice before the courts are not regulated and therefore are not subject to regulatory oversight of the Lawyers Council of Thailand. Law graduates who perform corporate and commercial legal services either in law firms or in-house are not required to obtain a Lawyer's License nor are they required to register with any regulatory body.
To obtain a Lawyer's License, with the right to appear in court, an individual must have the following qualifications: (i) be a Thai national; (ii) be at least 20 years of age; (iii) be a graduate with either a bachelor's degree or an associate degree in Law or an equivalent Certificate in Law from an educational institution accredited by the Lawyers' Council of Thailand; (iv) not be a person of indecent behavior or delinquent morals or a person whose conduct is indicative of dishonesty; (v) not have been imprisoned by a final judgment; (vi) not have been bankrupt by a final judgment; (vii) not having an ailment which is contagious and repugnant to the public; (viii) not being physically disabled or mentally infirmed which may cause professional incompetence; (ix) not be a government official or a local government official with permanent salary and position; (x) take a training course offered by the Lawyers Council of Thailand (normally one month of theoretical training and at least six months of practical training); (xi) pass the Thai Law Society examinations (Sapa Tanai Kwam); (xii) enroll with the Thai Bar Association (Regulation of Lawyers Council on Lawyer's Training B.E. 2529 (AD 1986)). Candidates who have been an apprentice in a law firm for over a year and have passed an examination specified by the Board of Governors of the Lawyers Council of Thailand may be exempted from the period of practical training. The lawyer's licence is valid for two years but can be valid for lifetime for a fee (s.39 of the Thailand Lawyers Act). Lawyers who wish to obtain the title barrister-at-law which entitle the holder to take further examinations to become a judge or a public prosecutor, may take a further one- year course offered by the Thai Bar Association 


=== United Arab Emirates ===
A local lawyer must be registered on the Roll of Practicing Advocates, which requires the candidate to be a UAE national, at least 21 years old, have full civil capacity, have good character and reputation, not have been subjected to criminal or disciplinary actions arising from a breach of honor or trust, have a degree in law or Islamic law from an accredited educational institution, and have carried out at least one year of continuous practical legal training. UAE lawyers are qualified to practice throughout the country but each Emirate may make it a condition that a lawyer must have an office there in order to practice law. Every Emirate maintains further requirements for local lawyers. Individual foreign nationals wishing to practice law may gain an exception to the nationality requirement if they fulfill the age, civil capacity, and character requirements, have fifteen years of experience working in the legal field, must be a resident of the UAE, and must practice through a bureau of a national lawyer registered on the Roll of Practicing Advocates. Foreign law firms may carry out legal activities in the UAE subject to the regulatory requirements of the individual Emirate where they are present.


=== Vietnam ===
Prospective lawyers must complete a Bachelor of Law degree. Vietnamese law schools typically offer 4-year law programs. After obtaining their bachelor's degree, they must complete one year of professional legal training at the Judicial Academy under the Ministry of Justice and pass an exam. After obtaining a certificate from the Judicial Academy, law graduates must undergo a one-year traineeship with a law firm or law office, and must register the traineeship with the bar association of the locality where the law firm or law office is located. After completing the traineeship, the trainee must pass a bar examination conducted by the Vietnam Bar Federation. Upon passing the bar examination, the trainee lawyer must file for an application for a certificate of legal practice from the Ministry of Justice. Upon being granted a certificate, registration to a local bar association is required. The bar association which the trainee joins will then request that the Vietnam Bar Federation issue a lawyer card, which fully qualifies the trainee to practice law.


== Europe ==

Among European Union members, the Diplomas Directive (Directive no. 89/48/EEC) states that those who have obtained a license or diploma in one state can pursue the profession in another state. Thus, it is not difficult for a law degree in one jurisdiction to be used as a qualifying degree in another jurisdiction within the European Union.
In addition, European Union Directive 98/5/EC provides three main methods for a foreign lawyer to be integrated into the legal profession in another member state. Through the aforementioned process of 89/48/EEC, a lawyer's foreign diploma can be recognized in another member state, in addition to passing an aptitude test. Alternatively, actively practicing the law of the host state for a period of three years provides a pathway for bar admission in the host country. The three-year period can be shortened by fulfilling other requirements.


=== Albania ===
Albanian advocates should be members of the Albanian Bar Association (Albanian: Dhoma e Avokatise e Shqipërisë). To be admitted to the bar, a candidate must complete a law degree, complete an internship with a practicing advocate lasting a minimum of one year and receive a positive evaluation, complete the initial training program at the School of Advocacy, and pass the Advocate's Qualifying Exam.


=== Andorra ===
In Andorra, advocates should be members of the local bar association (Catalan: Col·legi d'Advocats d'Andorra).


=== Austria ===
In Austria, an attorney ("Rechtsanwalt" in German) must meet the following requirements:

hold a law degree,
complete a three-year apprenticeship in a law firm as a trainee lawyer ("Rechtsanwaltsanwärter"),
complete a seven-month clerkship at court,
complete the required amount of training seminars (42 sessions),
pass the bar exam.
Furthermore, trainee lawyers may only register as attorneys after they have accumulated a total of five years of professional experience (including the apprenticeship and the clerkship).
Austrian advocates should be members of one of a local bar associations which are organised into national bar association (German: Österreichischer Rechtsanwaltskammertag).


=== Belarus ===
In Belarus, an advocate (barrister) must be a member of one of a local bar associations which are organised into a National Bar Association (Belarusian: Беларуская рэспубліканская калегія адвакатаў). In order to be admitted to the bar, candidates must have a university degree in law. Law students in Belarus must specialize in one of the following fields to be eligible to practice law: jurisprudence, international law, state security, customs service, economic law, and state management in law. They must also undertake additional training in one of two ways. One of them is to obtain three years of professional legal experience by employment in a court or under other organizations and persons responsible for public order. The other is to undertake six months to a year of apprenticeship in a legal office. They must then pass an exam.


=== Belgium ===
In Belgium, a prospective lawyer ("advocaat" in Dutch, "avocat"/"avocat" in French) must meet following requirements:

hold a master's degree in law (which requires two years of study and the Bachelor in Law which requires three years of study) or hold a PhD in Law
taking the pledge in a court of appeal,
a three-year apprenticeship (Flemish prospective lawyers have to do 15 cases of pro bono during these 3 years),
the CAPA (French, 'Certificat d'aptitude à la profession d'avocat') course of study,
pass the final bar exam.
During the three-year apprenticeship the prospective lawyer is equivalent to a licensed lawyer, and can for instance issue legal opinions and directly represent clients before all courts (except for the Supreme Court).


=== Bulgaria ===
The Highest Counsil of Advocates (Bulgarian: Висш адвокатски съвет) regulates the profession of a lawyer in Bulgaria.


=== Croatia ===
All attorneys in Croatia have to be members of the Croatian Bar Association (Croatian: Hrvatska odvjetnička komora) as well as members of local bar associations (mandatory membership). The membership requires completion of the one-cycle five-year master's degree, the Bar Examination in the Republic of Croatia (which can be accessed after at least 18 months of apprenticeship), and at least three years of experience in a law office or in judicial bodies (or five years of experience on legal jobs outside judiciary), the time before Bar Examination included.


=== Czech Republic ===
A person must meet the following conditions in order to be admitted to practice law in the Czech Republic:

full capacity
Master's degree in law acquired at a Czech law school or analogous education acquired at a foreign university, if such an education is officially acknowledged as equivalent by an international treaty, by which the Czech Republic is bound, or if a particular enactment acknowledges such a foreign education, or if it is acknowledged due to its content and extent from the point of view of knowledge and skill as sufficient for practicing law by the Advocacy Enactment
at least three years of legal apprenticeship
personal integrity (absence of conviction for deliberate crime)
absence of disciplinary punishment of prohibition of law practice (if a person was already a law practitioner)
absence of being stricken from the list of law practitioners because of personal bankruptcy
absence of labour engagement or officiary engagement, except of engagement:
to the Bar Association or to similar organisation in other EU state
to a law practitioner or to a legal personality established in order to provide legal services
to a university as a lecturer
as a scientific worker of Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic
passing the bar exam
taking the pledge
Czech advocates should be members of the Czech bar association (Czech: Česká advokátní komora).


=== Denmark ===
In Denmark, to use the title of advokat one must complete an LL.B. (three years of study) and an LL.M. (which awards the academic title of Candidata Juris, and requires two years of study), followed by a three-year apprenticeship, one year as an assistant lawyer, and an exam which has a moot court element.
Danish advocates should be members of the Danish bar association (Danish: Advokatsamfundet).


=== Estonia ===
In Estonia, anyone may call themselves a lawyer and practice law. However, the title of advocate is restricted by law to members of the Estonian Bar Association (Estonian: Eesti Advokatuur). To join the Estonian Bar Association, candidates must obtain a master's degree in law and pass the bar examination.


=== Finland ===
Until 2013, anyone could in principle practice law in Finland, not just qualified lawyers. However, after the entry into force of the Licensed Legal Counsel Act (715/2011) on January 1, 2013, only attorneys that are members of the bar association (Finnish: Suomen Asianajajaliitto) and who may use the title asianajaja, or licensed legal counsel may represent clients in court.
To become a licensed legal counsel requires the completion of a legal education consisting of a Bachelor of Laws degree (or oikeusnotaari, which usually takes three years to complete) and a Master of Laws degree (or oikeustieteen maisteri), which usually takes one to two years to complete, and a traineeship of a minimum of one year in either Courts or in law firms.
After the traineeship is completed successfully, the district court awards the title of varatuomari (VT) or those who do not do a traineeship in Court can apply to be licensed legal counsel, which is in practice the basic qualification to practice law. To be admitted to the Finnish bar association, the same legal education requirement as for licensed legal counsel applies, but the traineeship requirement is four years and one has to pass a bar exam (Asianajotutkinto, "Advocates Exam") which also requires the demonstration of practical skills. In-house counsel are not allowed to be members of the bar, but can be licensed legal counsel. Also foreign attorneys can practice in Finland as in-house counsel, without being licensed in Finland, but are not allowed to represent clients in Courts 
Graduates holding a foreign LLB degree may be able to convert to Finnish law by taking additional undergraduate (oikeusnotaari) modules worth 50+ credits while pursuing their LLM studies at a Finnish university.


=== France ===
To become a French lawyer, an "avocat" (male) or "avocate" (female), one must: 

obtain an undergraduate degree (three years for a "licence") and complete a first year of Master of Laws (diplôme de maîtrise en droit), so a total of 4 years of study at university
take the exam to enter one of the CRFPA (Centres Régional de Formation à la Profession d'Avocat) where one completes an eighteen-month course and obtains an award of the requisite Certificat d'aptitude à la profession d'avocat (CAPA).
However, those with degrees from another country may become a licensed attorney with a French bar by passing an exam. Depending on one's qualifications, a non-French attorney can take the Article 97, 98, 99, or 100 exam. Each of these exams has different requirements.
French advocates should be members of one of a local bar associations which are organised into national bar association (French: Conseil national des barreaux).
French "juristes" (in-house counsels) do not need to hold the Certificat d'aptitude à la profession d'avocat (CAPA).


=== Georgia ===
Practicing law in Georgia as a lawyer (solicitor) does not require a license. To be qualified to offer legal support, advice, and services to clients, one must obtain an undergraduate degree in law (four years of study) and a postgraduate degree in law, which is awarded by the state examination commission and requires one year of study (the state examination authority confers the qualification of a lawyer). However, only the members of the Georgian Bar Association (ადვოკატები) are permitted to appear in court. Admission to the Georgian Bar Association requires completing higher legal education, passing the Bar Qualification Examination, Judicial Qualification Examination, or Prosecutor's Qualification Examination, and passing the one-year Professional Adaptation Program which consists of a 3-month theoretical course and a 9-month internship.


=== Germany ===
In Germany, a lawyer (Rechtsanwalt) must be a member of one of a local bar associations which are organised into national bar association (German: Bundesrechtsanwaltskammer). Membership in the local bar association requires the candidate to have passed two state examinations, or staatsexamen, in law.


==== Academic stage ====
At present, qualifying law studies do not carry a Bachelor or Master award but are instead concluded by state examinations (in contrast to university examinations). The rationale lies in the national interest of upholding the quality and comparability of legal training.
The First State Exam (Erstes Staatsexamen or Erste juristische Prüfung) is usually taken after four-and-a-half years of undergraduate law study. A university degree (Dipl.-jur. or Magister Jur.) may be granted by the university after completion of the exam, but this depends on the individual university's practice. Some prominent universities like the Law School of the University of Heidelberg do not grant a university degree after completion of the exam.


==== Vocational stage ====
The First State Exam is followed by a two-year practical phase (Referendariat) sponsored by the local Court of Appeal (Oberlandesgericht). This is characterised by part-time studies alongside full-time work and includes work placements at various institutions, including courts of law, criminal prosecution services, in-house legal teams in the public sector and private practice law firms. Upon completion of this two-year training period, a trainee is automatically registered for the Second State Exam (Zweites Staatsexamen or Assessorprüfung).
Foreign law degrees do not generally enable the holder to enter the vocational stage of legal training in Germany. Holders of a foreign law degree must pass a Section 112a equivalent means assessment (Gleichwertigkeitsprüfung nach § 112a DRiG) before they can be admitted to a German legal traineeship.


==== Admission ====
After successful completion of the second state exam, admission to the bar is completed, and the individual may apply to be licensed to practice as a lawyer or be employed by the state as a judge or state prosecutor.
Qualified lawyers holding an admission in another country may join a German local bar association if they have practiced law for several years; this is subject to individual examination.


=== Greece ===
Greece requires that a lawyer (δικηγόρος) be a member of one of a local bar associations which are organised into national bar association (Greek: Ολομέλεια Δικηγορικών Συλλόγων Ελλάδας). Requirements include an undergraduate law degree, which lasts at least four years, an eighteen-month apprenticeship, and the passing of the bar examination. Candidates should normally be under thirty-five years of age.


=== Hungary ===
The Hungarian Bar Association (Hungarian: Magyar Ügyvedi Kamara) is a public body and the national organization of attorneys, which has an independent administrative apparatus and budget.
The regional bar associations are the members of the Hungarian Bar Association.
The process is similar in scope to that of the German system, in that there is a dual-bar exam and practicum process. After a first degree in law, which is usually approximately 5 years, a student must pass the first level exam. Then, the apprentice must clerk or practice within a law practice for three years. Of which, one year may be substituted with further Ph.D. studies. However, they apprentice must then pass a series of 4 oral and written exams within certain subject to officially be admitted to their districts bar and practice law.


=== Iceland ===
Icelandic Bar Association (Icelandic: Lögmannafélag Íslands) regulates the profession of a lawyer in Iceland.


=== Ireland ===
Following the English tradition, Ireland has both barristers and solicitors. To become a solicitor, one must complete an undergraduate degree or pass the Preliminary Examination. One must then pass the Final Examination, complete a two-year apprenticeship, and finish the concurrent Professional Practice Courses. To become a barrister, one must complete an undergraduate law degree (BCL, which lasts three years or LL.B. which last four years) or the Kings Inns Diploma in Legal Studies which lasts two years, obtain the Degree of Barrister-at-Law from the Honorable Society of King's Inns (Irish: Óstaí an Rí), and finish a one-year pupillage (known as devilling).


=== Italy ===
Italy mandates membership in an Italian bar association, which requires completion of an undergraduate law degree (Laurea in Scienze Giuridiche, three years) along with a graduate law degree (Laurea Specialistica in Giurisprudenza (a two-year program which confers the title of Dottore Magistrale in Giurisprudenza), or simply the one-cycle five-year master's degree (Laurea a ciclo unico Magistrale in Giurisprudenza)), an 18-month apprenticeship, and passing of the professional exam.
There is a National Bar Association (Italian: Consiglio Nazionale Forense) representing the profession of avvocato at the national level in Italy. However, the structure of the Italian profession is decentralised, with the local bar associations (Consigli dell'Ordine degli Avvocati) holding most of the regulatory powers. The Consiglio Nazionale Forense deals with disciplinary policy for the profession; it is responsible for the Code of Conduct and will hear appeals from disciplinary decisions of the local bar associations.
There are more than 165 Local Bar Associations in Italy which correspond to the number of court districts in the country. Each local bar deals with the admission, supervision, training and disciplining of its members as well as maintaining the register of avvocati. All avvocati must be registered with their local bar in order to practise in Italy.
Exercise of the profession of avvocato without being duly qualified and registered with the Local Bar Association is a criminal offence under Italian Law.


=== Kosovo ===
Kosovar law distinguishes between "domestic lawyers," who must be citizens of Kosovo, and "foreign lawyers," who have an active license in a recognized jurisdiction and are admitted to practice in Kosovo under certain conditions.
Domestic lawyers must pass the bar exam. To sit for the bar exam, one must be a citizen of Kosovo, have a four-year bachelor in law or a master's in law, and complete a legal internship. The internship requirement is met after a one-year work as a trainee at the courts or a lawyer's office. Otherwise, the candidate should show two years of law-related experience with foreign or domestic organizations.
Foreign lawyers must have been licensed for at least five years in a U.S. or EU jurisdiction or in a country that permits Kosovo lawyers to practice under the same condition. They pass an abridged test administered by the Kosovo Bar and pay relatively higher fees than their domestic counterparts.


=== Latvia ===
In Latvia, anyone may call themselves a lawyer (jurist) and practice law, even without a law degree. However, advocate is a protected title and only members of the Latvian Bar Association (Latvian: Latvijas Zvērināto advokātu kolēģijā) may call themselves advocates and own an advocate's office. To be admitted into the Latvian Bar Association, one must obtain a master's degree in law and pass the bar examination.


=== Liechtenstein ===
Admission to practice as a lawyer in Liechtenstein is governed by the Rechtsanwaltsgesetz (RAG). The Liechtenstein Bar Association (German: Liechtensteinische Rechtsanwaltskammer) is responsible for all bar admissions, as of January 1, 2014. One is eligible to become a licensed lawyer (Rechtsanwalt) upon completion of a Master, Licentiate (Lizenziat), or Magister of Law degree at an Austrian or Swiss university, according to Art. 5 RAG.


=== Lithuania ===
Lithuanian advocates must be members of the Lithuanian Bar Association (Lithuanian: Lietuvos advokatūra). Admittance to the Lithuanian Bar Association requires a law degree followed by at least five years of work experience in the legal field, including two years as an advocate's assistant. Candidates must pass the qualification exam for lawyers and the bar exam. A person who has ten years of experience working as a judge or ten years of experience working as a prosecutor outside Lithuania or holds a doctoral degree in law is exempt from the qualification exam and only needs to pass the bar exam.


=== Luxembourg ===
Lawyers must register with a bar association in Luxembourg (Luxembourgish: Barreau vu Lëtzebuerg). Admission to a bar association has character, language, citizenship requirements. Applicants must also complete an apprenticeship or aptitude test, depending on the list to which one wants to register.


=== Malta ===
Malta's legal practice is fused and legal practice is regulated by the Chamber of Advocates (Maltese: Kamra tal-Avukati). Licence to practice law is granted by way of a warrant issued on completion of the Master of Advocacy (M.Adv) programme from Malta University (or a comparable international programme) and an admission exam in Maltese. Lawyers holding rights to practice in other jurisdictions can apply for an exemption from local practice prohibitions allowing them to offer services under their foreign title though permission is issued by discretion and requires three years' local legal practice and a comparable licence elsewhere.


=== Moldova ===
Moldova requires an undergraduate law degree and passage of the state examination.
The Bar Association of Moldova (Romanian: Uniunea Avocaților din Republica Moldova) regulates the profession of a lawyer in Moldova.


=== Monaco ===
In Monaco, advocates should be members of the local bar association (French: Ordre des Avocats de Monaco). The bar association is composed of three types of lawyers: junior lawyers, who may plead before any court except the Supreme Court and Court of Review but may not represent parties, lawyers, who may plead before any court and represent parties before criminal courts, the Magistrate's Court, the Employment Tribunal, and cases provided for by law, and avocat-défenseurs, who may plead before any court and represent parties. In order to join the bar association, one must have a master's degree in law from a French university or an equivalent qualification, and pass an examination. The Secretary of Justice may then appoint the candidate as a junior lawyer. Junior lawyers must subsequently complete a three-year training period in which they regularly attend hearings in various courts, attend conferences and training sessions in the courts, defend cases assigned to them by the legal aid system or court appointment, and work in the law practice of an avocat-défenseur. Junior lawyers who successfully complete the three-year training period may be appointed lawyers by the Secretary of Justice. After five years of successful practice, a lawyer may apply to be appointed as an avocat-défenseur. The appointment is made by Sovereign Ordinance.


=== Montenegro ===
Montenegro Bar Association (Montenegrin: Advokatska komora Crne Gore) regulates the profession of a lawyer in Montenegro.


=== Netherlands ===
In the Netherlands, to be a licensed lawyer (Advocaat), one must complete an undergraduate law degree (Bacheloropleiding or LL.B., which is three years of study), the master of law degree (doctorandus in law before implementation of the Bologna Process and conferring the meester title, which is a one-year LL.M. program), and a three-year apprenticeship.
Only holders of a law degree with civiel effect (i.e. a qualifying law degree) are admitted to regulated legal professions (juridische togaberoepen). Qualifying law degrees in the Netherlands must cover the four foundations of legal knowledge: Dutch private law, Dutch criminal law, Dutch administrative and constitutional law and international/European law.
Dutch advocates should be members of the Netherlands bar association (Dutch: Nederlandse Orde van Advocaten).


=== North Macedonia ===
In North Macedonia, advocates should be members of the local bar association (Macedonian: Адвокатската комора  на Република Северна Македонија).


=== Norway ===
Lawyers (advokat) have to be licensed in Norway. To become licensed by the authorities, one must earn an LL.M (master of law) degree (before 2008- cand. jur.-- candidatus juris) and  practice as an assisting lawyer (advokatfullmektig) for two years and practice as a police prosecutor (politiadvokat or politifullmektig) or deputy judge (dommerfullmektig) for two years, with some additional minor formalities. In addition, one must pass the permanent lawyer's bar exam in order to obtain full access to the profession.
Whilst the earlier cand. juris was normally a 6-year degree, the LL.M. is a 5-year degree.
Membership of the bar association (Nynorsk: Advokatforeningen) is optional.


=== Poland ===
In Poland, a lawyer (adwokat or radca prawny) must complete a magister's degree in law (which lasts five years) and be admitted to the Polish Bar Council (Polish: Naczelna Rada Adwokacka). There are several ways to gain admission to the bar, including: three years of training followed by the bar exam; five years of legal professional experience followed by the bar exam; a Ph.D. in law followed by either the bar exam or 3 years of legal professional experience; or possession of high academic qualifications in legal sciences (e.g., habilitated doctor or professor). Once admitted to the bar association of one occupation, a lawyer can move to another occupation with little hassle.


=== Portugal ===
In order to register as a lawyer (advogado) in Portugal with the Bar Association (Portuguese: Ordem dos Advogados Portugueses), one must have a law degree, complete an 18-month legal traineeship, and pass the bar exam.


=== Romania ===
The Romanian National Union of Bar Associations (Romanian: Uniunea Națională a Barourilor din România) regulates the profession of a lawyer (avocat) in Romania. A graduate of a Romanian law school with a bachelor's degree must pass the bar exam to obtain the status of a probationary lawyer. After practicing law under the supervision of another lawyer for two years as a trainee lawyer, one can pass the permanent lawyer's bar exam to obtain full access to the profession. Law No. 51/1995 provides paths for lawyers already educated or admitted in another EU member state to work as lawyers in Romania.


=== Russia ===
It is not necessary to have a license to practice law in Russia as a legal consultant, but only the members of the advocate's chambers (Russian bar associations) are permitted to appear in court on criminal matters (other persons can be a defence counsel in criminal proceeding along with an advocate but not in lieu of him) and to practice before the Constitutional Court (leaving aside persons having an academic degree of candidate or doctor in juridical sciences who may can represent parties in constitutional proceeding).
To become an advocate a person should pass special qualification exam. To sit for the exam, one must have a higher legal education and also two years of experience in legal work after graduation or a training program in a law firm after graduation. The Specialist degree in law is the most commonly awarded academic degree in Russian jurisprudence, but after Russia's accession to the Bologna process only bachelor of laws and master of laws academic degrees are available in Russian institutions of higher education.
An examination is administered by the qualifications commission of an advocate's chamber. The exam is both written and oral, but the main test is oral. The written exam takes place in the form of computer testing and includes issues of the professional conduct of advocate and advocate's professional responsibility. After successfully passing of the written exam the candidates are allowed to take the oral exam. As part of the oral exam, the candidate must demonstrate his knowledge in various bodies of law and solve some mimic a real-life legal tasks. The candidate who does not pass the qualification exam can try to pass it again after 1 year only. The qualifications commission is composed of seven advocates, two judges, two representatives of the regional legislature, and two representatives of the Ministry of Justice.
After successful passing the qualification exam a candidate should take the oath of advocate. From the moment of taking the oath, he becomes an advocate and a member of the advocate's chamber of the relevant federal subject of Russia. Advocate's chamber sends relevant information to the territorial subdivision of the Ministry of Justice of the Russian Federation, which includes the new advocate in the register of advocates of the relevant federal subject of Russia and issues to him an advocate's certificate, which is the only official document confirming the status of an advocate, on the basis of this information. The status of an advocate is granted for an indefinite period and is not limited by any age. There is only 1 advocate's chamber in each federal subject of Russia. Each advocate can be the member of only 1 advocate's chamber and can be listed in the register of advocates of the relevant federal subject of Russia only. In case of relocation to another region, the advocate ceases to be a member of the advocate's chamber and should be excluded from register of advocates at the old place of residence (advocate's certificate should be returned to the subdivision of the Ministry of Justice of the Russian Federation, which issued it), and after that he becomes a member of the advocate's chamber and is included in the register of advocates at the new place of residence (where he receive new advocate's certificate) without any exams. Each advocate can carry out his professional activity throughout Russia, regardless of membership in particular regional advocate's chamber and regardless of particular regional register where he is listed in. Advocates carry out their professional activity individually (advocate's cabinet) or as the member of advocate's juridical person (collegium of advocates, advocate's bureau). Advocate can open own cabinet after at least 3 years legal practice in collegium or bureau. An advocate, who has opened own cabinet, can not be the member of any advocate's juridical person, and an advocate, who is the member of one advocate's juridical person, can not be the member of any other advocate's juridical person. Advocate is obliged to report to advocate's chamber any changes in his membership in a collegium or a bureau and, equally, opening and closing a cabinet.
Advocate's chambers are professional associations of advocates, which are based on mandatory membership of advocates. All regional advocate's chambers are mandatory members of Federal Chamber of Advocates of Russian Federation (Russian: Федеральная палата адвокатов Российской Федерации), which is professional association at the federal level.
In Russia, foreign Advocates can advise on the legislation of their countries; they should register in the special register maintained by the Ministry of Justice of the Russian Federation to obtain the right to carry out this activity. Foreign advocate can in addition become Russian advocate. There are two possible paths for that. The first possibility is to become Russian advocate on the same basis as Russian citizens (i.e. through higher legal education in one of Russian universities, two years of experience in legal work in Russia after graduation or a training program in Russian law firm after graduation, successful passing the qualification exam). Since Russia's WTO Accession the second possibility is available: foreign advocate can just pass special qualification exam to become Russian advocate.


=== San Marino ===
Upon possession of a four-year bachelor's degree in law from a recognized foreign university, one must pass an examination for membership into the bar association (Ordine degli avvocati e notai). Furthermore, one must possess all civil rights, reside in San Marino, and be a citizen of San Marino or an eligible country.


=== Serbia ===
Article 6 of the "Law about Lawyers" ("Zakon o advokaturi") establishes the requirements to become a lawyer in Serbia. A prospective lawyer must have a law degree from a Serbian or recognized foreign university. Then, the lawyer must practice law at least 2 years within a law firm, and pass the Serbian bar exam. Health and character requirements apply. One must also be a citizen of Serbia. However, according to Article 14 of the law, a foreign citizen admitted to practice law in his home country can also be entered on the registry of lawyers.
Serbian advocates should be members of one of a local bar associations which are organised into national bar association (Serbian: Адвокатска комора Србије).


=== Slovakia ===
In Slovakia, one must first possess a master's degree in law or a foreign equivalent to become a lawyer. A training period between three and five years is also necessary. In addition to fulfilling character requirements and passing the bar exam, the applicant must take an oath. Upon fulfilling the aforementioned criteria, the applicant will be admitted to practice law by the Slovak Bar Association (Slovak: Slovenská advokátska komora). Some of these requirements can be waived for a person who is a university professor in law, has passed other Slovak legal examinations, or is admitted as a lawyer in another EU country.


=== Slovenia ===
To practice law, one must be admitted to the Slovenian Bar Association (Slovene: Odvetniška Zbornica Slovenije), which regulates the legal profession in Slovenia. To be admitted, one must complete a master's degree in law, pass the state legal exam, and have four years of work experience in the legal field.


=== Spain ===

In Spain, in order for lawyers to practice law they must be in possession of the Lawyer's Professional Title (lawyer's license) and they must be joined to a bar association of Spain (any of the 83 bar associations of Spain). In Spain it is compulsory (legally mandatory) to be joined to a bar association (it could be any of all Spain). In total there are 6 years of training in order to practice law.
In order to practice law (and to get the lawyer's license), the following requirements are necessary (legally mandatory): a bachelor's degree in Law (4 years), a master's degree in Law and Legal Practice (2 years), a legal internship (6 months, within those two years) and passing the All Spain Bar Examination (convened annually by the Government of Spain). Once the bar examination has been passed, the Minister of Justice issues the Lawyer's Professional Title (lawyer's license). Finally, with the lawyer's title, you can join any bar association and practice law.
In Spain, in total there are 6 years of training in order to practice law. The current system was created by the Law 34/2006 and the Royal Decree 775/2011, of 3 June. The first time the All Spain Bar Examination was convened (the new system) was in 2014 by virtue of the Royal Decree 150/2014, of March 7.


=== Sweden ===
In Sweden, there is no monopoly on the practice of law. Anyone may call themselves a lawyer (jurist), open a legal office, and practice law regardless of training or experience. Litigants are not required to employ qualified counsel, and anyone may appear before any court representing themselves or another person. However, the title of advokat is reserved by law for members of the Swedish Bar Association (Swedish: Sveriges advokatsamfund), and in practice advokats act as defense counsel in the vast majority of criminal cases. The title in effect serves as a quality label for those offering legal services. Membership in the bar association requires an LL.M. degree (juristexamen, which lasts four and a half years); three years of legal work which must be in a law office (either an established firm or one's own firm), and the passing of an oral examination.


=== Switzerland ===
In Switzerland, lawyers must complete a Bachelor of Law (BLaw, which lasts 3 years), a Master of Law (MLaw, which lasts three terms), a one- to two-year traineeship (depending on the Canton), and pass the bar examination.


=== Turkey ===
In Turkey, lawyers (avukat in Turkish) must have a bachelor's degree in law from a Turkish university or fulfill the exams required by the Council of Higher Education if they graduated from a foreign university, pass the Exam for Entrance to the Legal Professions (Hukuk Mesleklerine Giriş Sınavı), register to a local bar and the Turkish Bars Association, and complete one year of internship. Foreign citizens may have a degree from a Turkish faculty of law but only Turkish citizens may practice law in Turkey.


=== Ukraine ===
The Ukrainian National Bar Association (Ukrainian: Національна асоціація адвокатів України) regulates the legal profession in Ukraine. In order to be admitted to the bar with the title of advokat (адвокат), one must have a law degree, two years of legal experience, completed legal traineeship, and passed the bar exam. Knowledge of the Ukrainian language is obligatory.
A foreign-qualified lawyer may be listed on the United Register of Advocates of Ukraine, and hence practice law in Ukraine, if he or she applies through a regional bar association.


=== United Kingdom ===
The United Kingdom comprises three distinct legal jurisdictions:

English law in England and Wales
Northern Ireland law in Northern Ireland
Scots law in Scotland
As such, admission to practice law requires different qualifications in each country of the UK.


==== England and Wales ====
In England and Wales, different qualifications are required to become a solicitor or a barrister, both of whom are lawyers, with different rights of audience in the courts. Most lawyers are solicitors, dealing directly with clients, while barristers are specialist advocates, instructed by solicitors. For both professions, one must either obtain an undergraduate law degree (LL.B., which typically lasts three years), or an undergraduate degree in another field and then complete the Common Professional Examination/Postgraduate Diploma in Law, which lasts one year. Future barristers must also pass Bar Course Aptitude Test (BCAT) and complete the Bar Professional Training Course (formerly Bar Vocational Course), followed by a year of vocational training known as a pupillage and be a member of one of the four prestigious Inns of Court.
Potential solicitors are required to complete the Legal Practice Course, which lasts one year, then a two-year apprenticeship under a training contract, during which the trainee solicitor has to complete a Professional Skills Course.
Chartered Legal Executives (formerly known as Fellows of CILEx) are the third type of lawyer in the UK and undertake a series of training courses and are required to pass a series of exam and coursework units to gain qualification. The first stage for the full vocational route to qualifying is called the CILEx Level 3 Professional Diploma in Law and Practice and is set at the equivalent to A-level law. The second  qualifications are equivalent to an honours degree course - the CILEx Level 6 Diploma in Law and Practice. Thirdly, once all exams are complete, trainees must complete a portfolio similar to that of solicitor trainees over the course of 12 months.
Trainees will often work at the same time as studying in order to acquire practical skills. The courses can be undertaken at a college, university or through an open learning programme. The courses are open to graduates and non-graduates. Chartered Legal Executives qualify after completing their CILEX training as well as a minimum of three years' qualifying employment, which is usually done during the course of qualification, as the course is often run as a 5-year apprenticeship. Chartered Legal Executives may do a wide range of legal work although, like solicitors, they generally specialise in one area. After completing their qualification, Legal Executives fill qualified lawyer roles within firms across a wide range of subject areas and can go on to fill higher up roles including as partners in firms and as judges within the judiciary.
In September 2021, the Solicitors Regulation Authority introduced the Solicitors Qualifying Examination (SQE). Potential solicitors who do not qualify under the transitional agreements with the Legal Practice Course must follow the SQE admission requirements:

possess a degree (in any subject)
pass both phases of SQE assessment: SQE1 (functioning legal knowledge) and SQE2 (practical legal skills)
complete two years of qualifying work experience
satisfy the Solicitors Regulation Authority character requirements.
Qualified lawyers already admitted in the UK or another jurisdiction have a simplified path to admission as a solicitor in England and Wales. They do not require qualified working experience and can apply for exemptions to SQE exams.
Barristers are members of the General Council of the Bar, commonly known as the Bar Council. Solicitors are members of the Law Society of England and Wales.


==== Northern Ireland ====
Northern Irish barristers are members of the Bar of Northern Ireland. The Bar of Northern Ireland and the General Council of the Bar of Northern Ireland are governed by the Constitution adopted on 5 October 1983. Northern Irish solicitors are members of the Law Society of Northern Ireland, which was established by Royal Charter on 10 July 1922.
To qualify as a barrister, one must complete a qualifying law degree (QLD) and then a Bar Postgraduate Diploma in Professional Legal Studies from the Institute of Professional Legal Studies at Queen's University Belfast. Candidates who complete these requirements are then called to the bar, but before they may practise they must complete a one-year pupillage under a practising barrister of at least seven years' standing.
Prospective solicitors must either complete a qualifying law degree or a degree in a field other than law acceptable to the Law Society's Education Committee and satisfy the Law Society that they have attained a satisfactory level of knowledge in eight specific areas of law. They must then undergo an apprenticeship under a practising solicitor known as their "master" and complete a Postgraduate Diploma in Professional Legal Studies, also known as the Solicitor Course, from the Institute of Professional Legal Studies at Queen's University Belfast. The training is divided into three months of office-based training under their master, one year of studying for their diploma with Easter, summer, and Christmas being spent in the office, and eight more months of training and work in the office under their master.


==== Scotland ====
In Scotland, a lawyer normally studies for an LL.B. in Scots law; as an Undergraduate degree. This takes three years for an ordinary degree or four years as an honours degree. The LL.B. can be taken as a graduate entry degree which takes two years. The process of admission to practice law then depends on whether a lawyer wishes to become a solicitor or an advocate.
Admission to practice as a solicitor is regulated by the Law Society of Scotland, with solicitors having to study for a one-year Diploma in Professional Legal Practice and then complete a traineeship in a law firm. Solicitors have rights of audience before the sheriff courts and justice of the peace courts.
Admission to practice as an advocate, having rights of audience before the Court of Session and the High Court of Justiciary, is regulated by the Faculty of Advocates. The Faculty of Advocates exercises this authority under the Act of Sederunt (Regulation of Advocates) 2011, which delegates the responsibility from the Court of Session. An Act of Sederunt is a form of subordinate legislation passed by the Court of Session, and the powers to regulate admission to practice as an advocate is set by Section 120 of the Legal Services (Scotland) Act 2010, which states:

120 Regulation of the Faculty
(1) The Court of Session is responsible—
(a) for—
(i) admitting persons to (and removing persons from) the office of advocate,
(ii) prescribing the criteria and procedure for admission to (and removal from) the office of advocate,
(b) for regulating the professional practice, conduct and discipline of advocates.
(2) The Court's responsibilities within subsection (1)(a)(ii) and (b) are exercisable on its behalf, in accordance with such provision as it may make for the purpose, by—
(a) the Lord President, or
(b) the Faculty of Advocates.
Prospective advocates (called devils or intrants) will complete a period of training in a solicitor's office, a period of devilling, and then must pass an assessment under the Faculty's Scheme of Assessment for Devils. The Faculty publishes detailed regulations as required by the Act of Sederunt, which lay out all of the requirements for prospective Advocates.


== Oceania ==


=== Australia ===
In Australia, prospective lawyers must complete an undergraduate LL.B. or graduate JD or a Diploma in Law. All law degree courses must cover eleven specified areas of law known as the Priestley 11 in order for the degree to be recognised as a qualification for admission to practice. After obtaining a law degree, candidates must complete a practical legal training program which adheres to the Competency Standards for Entry-Level Lawyers. The requirement can be satisfied by a Graduate Diploma in Legal Studies, which is offered at various Australian legal education institutions. In Victoria and Queensland law graduates also have the option of a supervised legal training program, and in Western Australia law graduates have the option of an apprenticeship as an articled clerk.
Admission to practice is a matter for each State. However, a person holding a practising certificate in any Australian jurisdiction is entitled to practise from time to time in another Australian jurisdiction without gaining admission in that jurisdiction.
New Zealand practitioners may apply for admission pursuant to Trans-Tasman Mutual Recognition Act 1997 (Cth).


==== New South Wales ====
A person is admitted as a legal practitioner after completing the required academic and practical training requirements. These matters are dealt with in the Legal Profession Act 2004. The applicant applies to the Legal Profession Admission Board who assesses applications (both local and foreign), and is ultimately admitted as a lawyer by the Supreme Court of New South Wales (s31 of the Legal profession Act 2004).
After admission, a person is then entitled to apply for a practising certificate from the Law Society of New South Wales (if they wish to practice as a solicitor), or the NSW Bar Association (if they wish to practice as a barrister). The practising certificate requires the payment of fees, insurance and a contribution to the fidelity fund (which compensates clients in some circumstances).
For a solicitor to work independently with unrestricted certificate, solicitor must practice with another solicitor for two years who has held unrestricted certificate for ten years. Restrictions are shown on the certificate. To practice in Federal Court a solicitor must apply to court for a certificate and for a solicitor or barrister to appear in WCC in NSW they must be accredited by WIRO.


==== Victoria ====
Under the Legal Profession Act 2004 (Vic), an individual may practise law, as a legal practitioner, in the state of Victoria if he or she has been admitted to the legal profession in any Australian jurisdiction and holds a current local or interstate practising certificate. Furthermore, the Legal Profession (Admission) Rules 2008 (Vic) replace articles of clerkship with supervised workplace training and make changes to the process of admission to practice. Under these new rules, upon completion of an approved training course and attainment of an accredited law degree, a law graduate needs to complete either a Practical Legal Training (PLT) program or Supervised Workplace Training (SWT) to be admitted to practise law in Victoria.


=== Fiji ===
Fiji requires a Bachelor of Law degree (four years of study) as well as the successful completion of either a Professional Diploma in Legal Practice from the University of the South Pacific or a Graduate Diploma in Legal Practice from the University of Fiji, or an equivalent law degree and bar admission course from abroad. Anyone admitted as a barrister or solicitor or their equivalent in a Commonwealth country may be admitted to practice law in Fiji so long as the applicant is a Commonwealth citizen, has resided in Fiji for at least three months, and has sufficient legal experience to satisfy the Chief Justice.


=== New Zealand ===

New Zealand requires an undergraduate law degree (LL.B., which lasts four years), and completion of the Professional Legal Studies Course (which lasts five months).
Australian lawyers can apply for mutual recognition if they're admitted, for admission to the courts as a lawyer in New Zealand.


== See also ==
Bar (law)
Lawyer
Practice of law
Disbarment
Practising certificate


== Notes ==


== References ==.
A foreign legal opinion (or foreign law opinion) is an opinion of a law firm issued in cross-border commercial transactions certifying the effectiveness of the transaction under the applicable foreign law.   Foreign legal opinions have become highly standardised over time, and most foreign legal opinions follow a fairly regimented format.  The issuance of such opinions has become something of a sub-legal specialisation in itself, and books and articles are written on the subject of foreign legal opinions.  A number of organisations issue template format opinions to indicate issues which are intended to be covered by such opinions, or standard form checklists for contents.


== Purpose ==
The original purpose of foreign legal opinion is grounded in the historical doctrine of ultra vires.  The concern was that when doing business with a corporation formed in a foreign country, proper due diligence required that a legal opinion be sought to ensure that the relevant foreign company had the necessary capacity and power to enter into the transaction, and that it would be binding upon it.  Over time opinions expanded to cover related aspects of foreign law, such as whether payments might be subject to exchange controls or usury laws, whether it was necessary for any of the other parties to hold any licences or permits under the regulatory laws of the foreign country, whether there would be adverse tax consequences under the laws of the foreign country, whether foreign judgments were recognised and enforced in that country other collateral matters.
During the 1970s and 1980s with the expansions in cross-border lender by financial institutions, banks became increasingly concerned to ensure that foreign companies to whom they lent money provided a foreign legal opinion certifying the legal validity of the loan transaction and the enforceability of the banks' rights (including any security interests).  In time these requires came to be reflected in the Basel capital adequacy requirements for banks, resulting in different, more favourable, capital weighting for loans supported by opinions.


== Format ==
Foreign legal opinions are now highly standardised.  Typically such opinions will confirm the jurisdiction which they relate to, confirm the documents that they reviewed, list certain assumptions of fact, and then set out various opinion statements.  After the opinion statements, they will typically make certain standard, generally applicable qualifications.
The opinion will ordinarily state the conclusions of law, but will not provide reasoning.  This reflects the role of the foreign law opinion as a risk assessment tool.  The opinion is normally issued in the format of an unqualified favourable statement of the effectiveness of the transaction (hedged in by appropriate assumptions of fact and general qualifications of law).  Where there are areas of legal uncertainty, or issues which require clarification and analysis, the foreign legal opinion will often remain in the standardised format, but will be supplemented with a second, reasoned, opinion.  In cross border transactions the negotiation and discussion of the format of the foreign law opinions elucidates areas of legal stress or risk in relation to the proposed transaction and foreign legal systems.
Standard assumptions normally include assuming that documents and records reviewed by the law firm giving the opinion are accurate, that all copies they review are true copies, and that no provision of any other law (i.e. the laws of any country other than the country on whose laws the opinion is being given) adversely affects the opinion being expressed.  In certain countries it is also standard to assume the genuineness of signatures and seals, but in other countries the foreign law firm may be expected to verify the accuracy of such signatures.
The substantive opinion statements a foreign legal opinion will make will ordinarily include:

that the relevant obligations be recognised as constituting valid and binding obligations of the foreign party;
which person or organ has power on behalf of the foreign entity to enter into the transaction;
the proper method of execution of documents by the foreign party;
that the transaction does not breach the constitutional documents of the foreign entity, or the laws of the foreign country (and, sometimes, any agreements which are binding upon the foreign entity and its assets);
that no approvals or licences are required in the foreign country in relation to the transaction;
that the transaction documents are not subject to stamp duty or registration requirements in the foreign country;
that no withholding or other taxes apply to the transaction in the foreign country;
that the foreign entity does not have sovereign immunity under the laws of the foreign country;
that there are no exchange control regulations in the foreign country which would affect the transaction;
that the foreign entity is in good standing, and is not subject to winding-up or dissolution;
to what extent judgments or arbitral awards from another country would be recognised and enforced in the foreign country (without re-examination of the merits);
the efficacy of choice of law clauses and jurisdiction clauses in the foreign jurisdiction;
whether any terms of the transaction contravene public policy in the foreign country; and
whether any of the other parties to the transaction (other than the foreign entity) would be treated as carrying on business or subject to tax in the foreign country by entering into the transaction.
Standard qualifications are usually matters of general law which it is impractical to advise upon in the abstract, but which might undermine the effectiveness of the enforceability of the transaction.  For example most opinions will indicate that if the foreign party goes into bankruptcy that will limit the ability to enforce obligations against it.  Similarly, rights may be lost when statutory limitation periods expire.  In certain countries enforcement of obligations may be subject to obligations of good faith and fair dealing, and the foreign legal opinion will normally point this out by way of qualification.


== Conflicts of laws ==
The foreign legal opinion will typically express opinions on various issues which might not ordinarily be governed by the laws of the foreign country under its own conflict of laws system.  Because a cross border transaction might end up being considered by the courts of any of a number of countries, the addressee(s) of the opinion will wish to be assured that all relevant issues, if determined by that foreign law, would likely be resolved satisfactorily.  The courts of a third country may apply different choice of law rules to determine the lex causae of a particular issue to the courts of the foreign country.


== See also ==
Legal opinion in commercial transactions


== External links ==
A Guide to Legal Opinions Under English Law Archived 2014-08-19 at the Wayback Machine


== Footnotes ==.
Public interest law refers to legal practices undertaken to help poor, marginalized, or under-represented people, or to effect change in social policies in the public interest, on 'not for profit' terms (pro bono publico), often in the fields of civil rights, civil liberties, religious liberty, human rights, women's rights, consumer rights, environmental protection, and so on.
In a celebrated 1905 speech, Louis Brandeis decried the legal profession, complaining that "able lawyers have to a large extent allowed themselves to become adjuncts of great corporations and have neglected their obligation to use their powers for the protection of the people."
In the tradition thus exemplified, a common ethic for public-interest lawyers in a growing number of countries remains "fighting for the little guy".


== By jurisdiction ==


=== Central and Eastern Europe ===
At the end of the communist period in the early 1990s, the national legal systems of Central and Eastern Europe were still in a formative stage. The most important source of legal authority for the new human rights groups came from outside the region: the Council of Europe, with its European Convention on Human Rights, and the European Court of Human Rights.
Over time, in the mid-1990s, U.S. experiences became more relevant. The Council of Europe's prerequisite that lawyers use their own country's courts first to seek legal remedies before turning to the European bodies gradually became more than a pro forma exercise, and civil society organizations began to make more effective use of domestic means of adjudication. But by the time local activists were ready to consider the utility of impact litigation, test cases, and other tactics familiar from the U.S. experience, they already understood that their ultimate tactical weapon in any piece of litigation was to use the threat or reality of a supportive decision at the European Court of Human Rights. With this background in mind, it made more sense for the promoters of public interest law in Central and Eastern Europe to talk about "strategic litigation" than about public interest litigation. Using the instrumentality of the European Court of Human Rights effectively required a strategic approach. Not all human rights cases were likely to receive a favorable ruling; a negative ruling could produce more damage to the human rights cause than no ruling at all. The European Court had a rich case law that could provide clues to how a future case might be decided, and there were procedural aspects, such as the requirement to exhaust domestic remedies, to consider.
The core lesson from the U.S. experience for local activists was how courts could be used effectively as a tool for civil society engagement in governance.


=== Italy ===
The changes to the Italian electoral law from 2014 to 2017 were both "caused by actions born from the bottom (...) the result of a methodical, studied and concerted action. It has been featured by university professors, constitutional and electoral law-makers, parliamentarians and other elected representatives (...), representatives of civil society and ordinary citizens. Their names are, as voters, in more than twenty introductory pleadings (quotations or appeals)", all of them brought pro bono.


=== China (mainland) ===

Public interest law (公益法) is an accepted term in China, where the basic institutions supporting the rule of law are still extremely nascent. China does not have a common-law system in which lawyers are expected to play a key role in "making law."  Nevertheless, a small but effective community of lawyers has gained acceptance of public interest litigation as a legitimate means of resolving social issues and contributing to a harmonious society, and non-governmental actors have significantly improved the enforcement of rights for migrant workers, women, children and those suffering from environmental degradation, among others. For example, public interest lawyers in China have filed lawsuits in court successfully challenging workplace sexual harassment and the involuntary confinement of healthy people to mental hospitals.
Chinese reformers believe that one avenue for speeding the development of public interest law is implementing an associational standing rule by which organizations can instigate lawsuits to protect the interests of its members. Currently, China's Civil Procedure Law is undergoing revision. One of the proposed amendments would create a form of associational standing. In theory, the new law would give domestic NGOs the power to file lawsuits in their own name on behalf of their members, but the proposed amendment has engendered spirited debate and its fate is unclear.


=== Hong Kong ===

In Hong Kong public interest law is an emerging field. The chief vehicle for pursuing public interest claims is judicial review. This is the process by which decisions of the government are challenged in the courts. There has been a surge in judicial review cases since 2000. Environmental issues and minority rights are among the most litigated areas.
One of the pioneers in public interest law in Hong Kong was Pamela Baker. In the late 1980s she litigated a series of landmark courtroom cases challenging the government's treatment of Vietnamese refugees. In 1995 the Hong Kong Human Rights Monitor was established with the aim of promoting better human rights protection in Hong Kong. Today, the majority of cause lawyers who represent citizens and social groups in human rights and public policy litigation on a consistent basis in Hong Kong are also members of political parties or active participants in social movements outside the courts.
In Hong Kong, the Legal Aid Department provides funding to legal services for those who pass the means and merits test. The two Legal Aid Schemes that it operates, namely the Ordinary Legal Aid Scheme (OLAS) and the Supplementary Legal Aid Scheme (SLAS) have facilitated the practice of public interest law through narrowing the resource inequality between economically disadvantaged litigants and the government. However, NGOs and charitable organizations are not eligible to get legal aid. The NGOs and Charitable organizations contributed to opening of avenues for people who deserved justice but lacked interest to approach courts and helped them in becoming petitioners to get justice.
Apart from legal aid, the Hong Kong Bar Association and The Law Society of Hong Kong jointly provides the Duty Lawyer Scheme which offers free legal representation to eligible defendants on the first day of court appearance. They also run the Free Legal Advice Scheme at their Legal Advice Centres within nine District Offices in Hong Kong with the aim to provide one-off preliminary legal advice to the general public without imposing any means test. The Hong Kong Bar Association and The Law Society of Hong Kong operate their own Bar Free Legal Service Scheme and Free Legal Consultation Scheme respectively where enrolled law firms and barristers specializing in different fields volunteer to give consultations on a pro bono basis.
In addition, unlike in the United States where NGOs and public interest law groups routinely bring public interest lawsuits on behalf of aggrieved individuals, in-house counsel working in NGOs and charities in Hong Kong are not allowed to directly represent the people these organizations serve. Some commentators believe that the inability of NGOs to directly represent clients in legal proceedings has dampened the growth of public interest law in Hong Kong.
Law schools in Hong Kong also organize various programs to promote the idea of pro bono legal service to students. Pro bono committees of law firms in Hong Kong also meet on a bimonthly basis in the Hong Kong Legal Community Roundtable, a forum for international law firms to discuss development of pro bono work in Hong Kong and the region.


=== India ===

"Public Interest Litigation" or PIL right since its inception in the Indian judicial system, has shown some good examples of safeguarding the rights of the people of India and has strengthened the position of the Supreme Court of India as preeminent guardian of Fundamental Rights enumerated in the Indian Constitution. It was introduced in India around 1979-80 by the Supreme Court judges, Justice V. R. Krishna Iyer along with Justice P. N. Bhagwati. And since then there had been instances when the Courts are keen to decide the matters of public importance without delay, as the case in Shyam Sundar where the court accepted the matter even when the application was made by a letter sent through post.


=== South Africa ===
South Africa has seen significant public interest litigation throughout its constitutional history. During colonial and apartheid rule, public interest litigation was used as a tool of struggle to resist unjust laws. During the late apartheid period from 1979, three public interest organisations were formed: the Legal Resources Centre, the Centre for Applied Legal Studies and Lawyers for Human Rights. Despite the hostile political environment and a legal system that was inimical to public interest lawyering, they achieved some notable successes opposing forced removals and contesting the system of pass laws and other racist laws. However, even as early as the late 19th century, litigation had been used as a strategy for resistance, especially by early black lawyers, many of whom were among the founders of the African National Congress.
Following the transition to democracy, the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa introduced radical changes to the legal system that have facilitated public interest litigation, including a justiciable Bill of Rights, broad rules of standing and flexible remedial powers for courts. Since 1995, the South African public interest litigation sector has grown, with a number of specialist organisations being established, alongside the older generalist organisations. South Africa has since seen extensive public interest lawyering seeking to give effect to the transformative promise of the Constitution, in particular to enforce socio-economic rights and shore up democratic institutions.


=== United States ===

"Public interest law" is a term that became widely adopted in the United States during and after the social turmoil of the 1960s. It built on a tradition exemplified by Louis Brandeis, who before becoming a U.S. Supreme Court justice incorporated advocacy for the interests of the general public into his legal practice. In a celebrated 1905 speech, Brandeis decried the legal profession, complaining that "able lawyers have to a large extent allowed themselves to become adjuncts of great corporations and have neglected their obligation to use their powers for the protection of the people." In the late 1960s and 1970s, large numbers of American law school graduates began to seek "relevance" in their work—wishing to affect the social issues that were so visibly and hotly debated within American society at that time. They defined themselves as public interest lawyers in order to distinguish themselves from the "corporate adjuncts" referred to by Brandeis.
Summing up the movement's history in the United States, Stanford University Law Professor Deborah Rhode writes: "Public interest lawyers have saved lives, protected fundamental rights, established crucial principles, transformed institutions, and ensured essential benefits for those who need them most....In virtually every major American social reform movement of the last half century, public interest lawyers have played an important role."
Public interest law does not describe a body of law or a legal field; the term was adopted to describe whom the public interest lawyers were representing, rather than what matters they would work on. Instead of representing powerful economic interests, they chose to be advocates for otherwise underrepresented individuals. Consequently, a significant current in public interest lawyering has always emphasized the need to provide legal services to those living in poverty. The term has grown, however, to encompass a broader range of activities of lawyers and non-lawyers working toward a multitude of objectives, including civil rights, civil liberties, women's rights, consumer rights, environmental protection, and so on. Nevertheless, a common denominator for public interest lawyers in the United States and in a growing number of countries remains the ethic of “fighting for the little guy”—that is, representing the underrepresented and vulnerable segments of society.
Public interest law is institutionalized in the United States. Nongovernmental organizations that work to promote and protect human rights using the U.S. legal system, fight to protect the environment, or advocate on behalf of consumers, call themselves public interest law organizations. A large community of lawyers practices public interest law in the form of providing legal aid free of charge to those who cannot afford to pay for it. However, the grim reality remains that lawyers are underpaid and grossly overworked, offering perfunctory representation. Clinical legal education, which is well established in the United States, provides opportunities for law students to do practical legal work on basic legal matters as well as more complex public interest issues, such as women's rights, anti-discrimination law, constitutional rights, and environmental protection, among others. Some law schools have public interest law centers, which advise law students interested in pursuing public interest law careers. Pro bono programs at bar associations and law firms provide opportunities for commercial lawyers to donate time to public interest law activities.


==== Funding ====
Most of the work done by public interest law organizations does not make money because their clients often cannot afford private counsel. In addition, the other activities they perform such as community outreach, organizing coalitions, talking to the press, and initiating grassroots campaigns, do not generate revenue. These organizations rely on federal funds, private foundation grants, donations, state funds, attorney's fees, membership dues, fundraising events, and fellowships for new lawyers. Federal funds and private foundation grants are the largest sources of funding for most organizations, however funding varies based on the type of organization. For example, economic liberalism and environmental organizations follow the membership-oriented approach of leading civil rights organizations such as the American Civil Liberties Union, whereas poverty organizations are more likely to use Legal Services Corporation (LSC) funds. The source of funding influence the impact and strategy pursued.
Since the 1960s/70s the amount of government funding has decreased and the kind of work LSC-funded organizations can perform has been restricted. In 1996, the Omnibus Consolidated Rescissions and Appropriations Act prohibited LSC funds for programs that "engaged in redistricting, lobbying, class action suits, training for political activities, any activities directed toward reforming federal or state welfare systems, abortion or prison litigation" and recovering attorney's fees. These restrictions cause government funded organizations to be more vulnerable to political shifts because the government has significant control over LSC funded organizations.
Because of the restrictions put on LSC-funded organizations, larger organizations such as the American Civil Liberties Union, that want to be able to engage in activities such as lobbying and class action, rely on other sources of funding. Public interest law organizations admit that the preferences of donors affect the priorities they can work on. For example, donors need measurable outcomes in order to see that their money is being put to good use. They will be more likely to donate again if there are concrete outcomes from their donations. The need for outcomes inhibits these organizations from working on more complex problems that tend to have less discrete solutions. It is easier to take on similar cases in order to attract the same donors that were moved to donate in the past. Grassroots organizing and coalition building, because they are not as visible as high profile litigation are not prioritized when resources are limited. However, in order to empower communities, grassroots organizing and coalition building is very important and has led to significant social reforms in the past.
An overall lack of funds necessary to meet the legal needs of the poor and underrepresented is one of the most significant issues facing organizations. Legal aid clinics across the country are forced to decline many of the requests they receive because of lack of resources. Lack of resources and failure to coordinate with individuals causes low-income household to obtain legal aid for less than 20% of their legal needs. During periods of increased hostility toward minorities, lawyers are forced to prioritize only the most severe violations of rights. By only being able to take the most severe cases, many people's needs remain unmet.  


=== United Kingdom ===

In law, public interest is a defence against certain lawsuits (for instance some libel suits in the United Kingdom) and an exemption from certain laws or regulations (for instance freedom of information laws in the UK). Also, judges in common law systems can make judgements on the grounds of public policy, a related term.


== See also ==
Cause lawyer
John Banzhaf
Legal mobilisation
Law
Natural law
National Lawyer's Guild
Private attorney general
Public defender
Rutherford Institute


== References ==

There is nothing in democracy every thing is equal, Doing Well, 57 Vand. L. Rev. 2087-2125 (2004).
Jeremy Rabkin, Public Interest Law: Is it Law in the "Public Interest"?, 8 Harv. J. L. & Pub. Pol'y 341-347 (1985).
Ann Southworth, Conservative Lawyers and the Contest over the Meaning of "Public Interest Law", 52 UCLA L. Rev. 1223-1278 (2005).
Patricia M. Wald, Whose Public Interest Is It Anyway: Advice for Altruistic Young Lawyers, 47 Me. L. Rev. 3-33 (1995).
History of the public interest law movement
Nan Aron, Liberty and Justice for All : Public Interest Law in the 1980s and Beyond (Westview Press, 1989, 166 p) KF390.5.P78 A96 1989.
Balancing the Scales of Justice: Financing Public Interest Law in America: A Report by the Council for Public Interest Law (1976, 361 p. & appendices) KF 299.P8C6 1976 Includes A History of Public Interest Law, at 17–76, and The World of Public Interest Law Today, at 77-161.
Bringing Justice to the People: The Story of the Freedom-Based Public Interest Law Movement / edited by Lee Edwards (Heritage Books, 2004, 218 p.) KF 390.5.P78 B74.
Gordon Harrison & Sanford M. Jaffe, The Public Interest Law Firm; New Voices For New Constituencies (Ford Foundation, 1973, 40 p.) KF299.P8 H37 Edited version of article originally published at 58 ABA J. 459-467 (1972).
Sanford M. Jaffe, Public Interest Law : Five Years Later (American Bar Association, Special Committee on Public Interest Practice, 1976, 52 p.) KF299.P8 J3.
F. Raymond Marks, The Lawyer, The Public, and Professional Responsibility (American Bar Foundation, 1972, 305 p.) KF 299.P8M3
Felice Batlan, The Ladies' Health Protective Association: Lay Lawyers and Urban Cause Lawyering, 41 Akron L. Rev. 701-732 (2008).
Edward Berlin, Anthony Z. Roisman, & Gladys Kessler, Public Interest Law, 38 Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 674-693 (1970).
Susan D. Carle, Re-Envisioning Models for Pro Bono Lawyering: Some Historical Reflections, 9 Am. U. J. Gender Soc. Pol'y & L. 81-96 (2001)
Richard Frank, The Public Interest Lawyer, 7 J. Int'l L. & Econ. 180-186 (1972).
Charles R. Halpern & John M. Cunningham, Reflections on the New Public Interest Law: Theory and Practice at the Center for Law and Social Policy, 59 Geo. L. J. 1095-1126 (1971). Includes Appendix B: Nader v. Volpe: A Case Study, at 1122–26.
Judith Kilpatrick, Race Expectations: Arkansas African-American Attorneys (1865- 1950), 9 Am. U. J. Gender Soc. Pol'y & L. 63-79 (2001).
Ralph Nader, Keynote Address, 40 San Diego L. Rev. 7-18 (2003) (part of symposium, Summit: Taking the Offensive).
Karen O'Connor & Lee Epstein, Rebalancing the Scales of Justice: Assessment of Public Interest Law. 7 Harv. J. L. & Pub. Pol'y 483-505 (1984). Includes history of both liberal & conservative public interest law groups.
David P. Riley, Challenge of the New Lawyers: Public Interest and Private Clients, 38 Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 546-587 (1970).
Francis B. Stevens & John L. Maxey, John L. II, Representing the Unrepresented: A Decennial Report on Public-Interest Litigation in Mississippi, 44 Miss. L. J. 333-390 (1973).
Globalization of public interest law
Scott L. Cummings, The Future of Public Interest Law, UC Los Angeles: UCLA School of Law (2011). Retrieved from escholarship.org
Edwin Rekosh, Kyra A. Buchko, and Vessela Terzieva, eds., Pursuing the Public Interest: A Handbook for Legal Professionals and Activists,   PILnet (then Public Interest Law Institute), New York (2001). Retrieved from pilnet.org - Synthesizes experiences of public interest advocates in former socialist countries..
An Act to incorporate the German Society of Montreal (the Act) is a public act of the Parliament of the Province of Canada, introduced, passed and assented to in the 3rd Session of the 8th Parliament in 1865, the 28th year of the reign of Queen Victoria. The purpose of the legislation was to vest the German Society of Montreal, a charitable association founded in 1835 with corporate powers to better achieve its mission.
The introduction of Bill 53 (A bill to incorporate the German Society of Montreal) followed a petition (Petition 126) by Henry Meyer, Ernest Idler, J. P. Seybold, Gottlieb Reinhard, Christian Beck and David Maysenholder, being officers and members of the German Society in February 1865.


== Structure ==
The Act, which is consistent with other incorporation acts published in that time period, consists of a preamble followed by nine articles:

Certain persons incorporated
Management of affairs
By-laws continued.
Officers
Execution of Deeds
Corporation may collect subscriptions
Allowances made by Corporation not liable to be taken in execution
Annual report
Public Act
The Act permits the Society to make and amend its by-laws in any way, "in so far as they are not repugnant to the laws of this Province [of Canada]"


== Consolidation of Statutes after Confederation ==
After Canadian Confederation (1867), the powers of the provincial and the federal parliaments were divided. The Commission for the Revision and Consolidation of the General Statutes of the Province of Quebec found that acts like the German Society's incorporation act fell under provincial jurisdiction and should be considered private acts.
As a result of the 1888 revision of the Statutes of Quebec, the Act to incorporate the German Society of Montreal was listed in Appendix B of acts considered to be acts of private nature, and was thus not consolidated in the Revised Statutes of Quebec.


== Present Situation ==
The German Society continues to be governed under the provisions of the Act, together with by-laws passed under it. It has not sought to migrate its incorporation to the Province's Companies Act.
In the provincial statutes, there has been no mention of the Act since its entry in Volume II of the Revised Statutes of the Province of Quebec in 1888.


== References ==


== External links ==
Journal of the Legislative Assembly of the Province of Canada. Quebec: Hunter, Rose & Co. 1865.
Journal of the Legislative Council of the Province of Canada. Quebec: Hunter, Rose & Co. 1865..
Georgia v. Public.Resource.Org, Inc., No. 18-1150, 590 U.S. 255 (2020), is a United States Supreme Court case regarding "whether the government edicts doctrine extends to—and thus renders uncopyrightable—works that lack the force of law, such as the annotations in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated" (OCGA). On April 27, 2020, the Court ruled 5–4 that the OCGA cannot be copyrighted because the OCGA's annotations were "authored by an arm of the legislature in the course of its legislative duties"; thus the Court found that the annotations fall under the government edicts doctrine and are ineligible for copyright.
Litigation began in 2013 after Carl Malamud published the OCGA on Public.Resource.Org (PRO). The state of Georgia filed a lawsuit in 2015. In March 2017, a federal court in the Northern District of Georgia ruled in the state's favor, after which in 2018 the Eleventh Circuit reversed the ruling. Both Georgia and PRO appealed to the Supreme Court, which heard arguments in December 2019.


== Background ==


=== Government edicts ===
In the United States, laws, statutes, and court decisions, all as edicts of government, are considered to be in the public domain, available to the public for free and not protected by copyright. This doctrine is rooted in the Copyright Act's 'authorship' requirement and posits that officials empowered to speak with the force of law cannot be the authors of the works they create in the course of their official duties. Based on the principle, the law must be free for publication to all.


=== Georgia ===
The Official Code of Georgia Annotated (OCGA) is assembled by a state entity called the Code Revision Commission (the Commission) and is the official law of Georgia.
The OCGA contains both the official statutes as well as annotations. The annotations explain and expound upon the statutes and contain "summaries of state attorney general's opinions, advisory opinions by the State Bar of Georgia, summaries of important court rulings, excerpts of law review articles, legislative histories[,] and repeals". The Commission entered into a work-for-hire agreement with Matthew Bender & Co., Inc., a division of the LexisNexis Group, to prepare annotations. The Georgia government asserted that it held copyright to the OCGA; further, Georgia's legislature exempted itself from the state's open records law. While the state claimed that the OCGA is easily accessible via libraries, journalists for Atlanta news channel 11Alive were "unable to find a complete set of current law books at three branches of the Fulton County Public Library, including the main branch in downtown Atlanta", noting that "[t]he law books were kept behind a locked door, and we had to ask for special permission to view them. Some volumes were as much as six years out of date." Additionally, LexisNexis's website displays only the statutory code and not the annotations.
In 2013, Carl Malamud purchased a 186-volume hard copy of the OCGA (at a cost of over $1,000; the cost is just below $400 for Georgia residents) and published the contents on the website Public.Resource.Org. In response, the State of Georgia, specifically the Code Revision Commission of the Georgia General Assembly, which oversees the OCGA's copyright, threatened to sue Malamud for copyright infringement over this posting.


=== District court ===
In 2015, Georgia's Code Revision Commission filed a copyright infringement lawsuit against PRO in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Georgia, demanding that the OCGA be taken offline. Public.Resource.Org asserted in its defense that since the state has chosen to make the Official Code of Georgia Annotated the official and authoritative code of the entire state, the Code should not be subject to copyright law, and should be freely available for all citizens to read and access. The code also holds, in denoting the annotated code as the "official code," that authorship and copyright remains with the State and not with the publisher. In the lawsuit, Georgia further alleged that Malamud's actions reflected a "strategy of terrorism". State representative Johnnie Caldwell Jr., Chairman of the Code Revision Commission, issued a statement explaining that "the OCGA contains two separate and distinct types of content... the law itself... [and] ancillary material, such as cross references, case annotations, editor's notes, law reviews, etc. Such ancillary material is expressly not law."
On March 23, 2017, a federal court in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Georgia ruled in favor of the state. It acknowledged that the annotations in the OCGA presented “an unusual case because most official codes are not annotated and most annotated codes are not official" and therefore that these annotations were eligible for copyright protection since they were “not enacted into law” and lacked “the force of law.”  As a result it held that PRO did not "[meet] its burden of proving fair use, and [the state of Georgia] [is] entitled to partial summary judgment" and entered a permanent injunction requiring PRO to cease its distribution activities and to remove the digital copies of the OCGA from the internet.


=== Eleventh Circuit ===
On October 18, 2018, the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit unanimously reversed the previous ruling, finding that the OCGA is "intrinsically public domain material" and that its annotations "clearly have authoritative weight in explicating and establishing the meaning and effect of Georgia's laws". The Court relied on the case of Banks v. Manchester (1888), in which the Supreme Court articulated the government edicts doctrine by finding that "there can be no copyright in the opinions of the judges, or in the work done by them in their official capacity as judges", and a report from the Copyright Office noting that "the  judicially established rule... still  prevent[s] copyright in the text of state laws... and similar official documents". The Court also identified three factors that would determine whether authorship in a work is constrictively attributable to that of the people, namely:

the identity of the public official who created the work;
the nature of the work; and
the process by which the work was produced.
As a result the Court stated that the people are "constructive authors" of the law and judges and legislators are merely draftsman that are exercising authority delegated to them. Thus, the court found that "the annotations in the OCGA, while not having the force of law, are part and parcel of the law. They are so  enmeshed with Georgia's law as to be inextricable... They are therefore uncopyrightable".
The state assembly of Georgia appealed this decision to the United States Supreme Court. Both PRO and the state of Georgia urged the Supreme Court to grant certiorari to the government's appeal; on June 24, 2019, the Supreme Court agreed to review the case (No. 18-1150). The Court heard oral arguments in the case on December 2, 2019.


== Supreme Court ==
The Court accepted the case to decide the question:Whether the government edicts doctrine extends to—and thus renders uncopyrightable—works that lack the force of law, such as the annotations in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated.
Oral arguments were held on December 2, 2019, at which many of the justices focused on the role of the legislature in approving the annotated statutes for publication, questioning whether this made the annotations equivalent to legislation, which cannot be copyrighted.
On April 27, 2020, the Court ruled in a 5-to-4 decision, that Georgia does not have copyright over its annotated legal code. Chief Justice John Roberts authored the majority opinion, joined by Associate Justices Sonia Sotomayor, Elena Kagan, Neil Gorsuch, and Brett Kavanaugh: he noted that, binding law or not, official works of the Georgia legislature could not be copyrighted, as they could deprive citizens of knowledge of those laws and their corollaries. Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg filed a dissenting opinion, joined by Stephen Breyer, while Justice Clarence Thomas filed another dissenting opinion with which Samuel Alito joined and Breyer joined except for Part II-A and footnote 6.


=== Majority ===
The majority held that copyright protection does not extend to the annotations contained in Georgia's official annotated code. The route taken to hold this was the "government edicts doctrine". Like the 11th Circuit, they cited the SCOTUS decision in Banks v. Manchester (1888) and extend the same logic as they applied to legal binding and non-bind material created by judges, to non-binding, non-authoritative and explanatory legal materials created by a legislative body vested with the authority to make law.
The Court adopted the following framework to apply the government edicts doctrine as follows:
First, regarding the identity of the official that created the work, the Court held that the Commission, as the sole author of the work (since the annotations prepared by LexisNexis pursuant to the work-for-hire agreement), qualifies as a legislator. They held that the Commission functions as an arm for the Georgia Legislature and its work thus falls under the sphere of "legislative authority". In order to hold this they noted that the Commission was composed predominantly of legislators and received funding designated by the law for the legislative branch. Finally, it was the legislature itself that approved and merged the annotations with the statutory provisions and published the OCGA "by authority of the state".
Second, regarding the nature of work, the Court held that the Commission creating the annotations is in the "discharge" of its legislative duties. Although the annotations are not enacted into law through bicameralism and presentment, the preparation of the annotations is under an act of "legislative authority". The fact that the commentary and case laws in the annotations are approved by the legislature shows that they deemed it to be relevant.
The Court rejected the argument by the State of Georgia that the annotations are copyrightable by virtue of §101 of the US Copyright Statute since it specifically lists "annotations" among the kinds of works eligible for copyright protection. They ruled that this provision refers only to annotations that represent an original work of "authorship" and the Commission, serving in its official capacity, cannot serve as an author due to the government edicts doctrine. They clarified that §101 protects annotations in case they are prepared by a private party or non-lawmaking officials. This is elucidated by distinguishing the decision in Banks from Callaghan v. Myers where the Court permitted a reporter to hold copyright in explanatory materials he had added to the judgements, such as headnotes, syllabi, tables of contents, on the grounds that he did not have authority to speak with the force of law.
The Court also rejected the contention that the US Copyright Statute while excluding "work[s] prepared by an officer or employee of the United States Government as part of that person's official duties" from copyright protection, does not establish a similar rule for the States. The Court held that the policy reasons that justify the Federal Government's decision to forfeit copyright protection for its own proprietary works, does not suggest an intent to displace the already narrow government edicts doctrine with respect to the States. The doctrine does not apply to non-lawmaking officials, leaving States free to assert copyright in the vast majority of expressive works they produce, such as those created by their universities, libraries, tourism offices, and so on.
The State of Georgia also contended on policy grounds that the purpose of the Copyright Act is to promote the creation and dissemination of creative works and without such protection many states will be unable induce private parties to assist in the preparation of affordable annotated codes for widespread distribution. The Court however states that it cannot decide this matter and that the Congress is the right body to decide such a policy issue.
Additionally, contrary to Justice Thomas' dissent and the State of Georgia's contention that the government edicts doctrine lacks textual footing, the Court stated that the doctrine has textual footing by way of the "authorship" requirement. Specifically, Congress' enactment of the 1976 Copyright Act with the word "author[ship]", the same phrase interpreted by Banks, implicitly incorporates the Banks' interpretation of the phrase "author" into the 1976 Copyright Act.
The Court finally observes that a decision allowing copyright protection for anything merely falling short of being classified as a statute or a judicial opinion would result in First Amendment concerns.


=== Dissents ===


==== Thomas ====
Justice Thomas holds that regulations cannot be copyrighted, but accompanying notes lacking legal force can be. The opinion states that the majority opinion was flawed on the following precedential and textual grounds.


===== Precedential Grounds =====
The opinion states that the majority incorrectly interpreted precedents and that they did not attempt to examine the root and context of the precedents. The opinion notes that while precedents establish that judicial opinion cannot be copyrighted, they do not exclude the notes prepared by an official court reporter published together with reported opinions from copyright protection.
The opinion illustrates the context in which Banks was decided, i.e., in the 19th century, much before multiple revisions made to the Copyright Act. At the time, copyright protection was extended for books, maps, prints, engravings, musical and dramatic compositions, photographs, and works of art. It notes that judicial opinions were starkly different from this list of works because they are legally binding, reflect the application of the rule of law, and in turn represent the implementation of the will of the people. They note that in Banks, the Court never categorically prohibited the States from holding copyrights as authors or assignees and merely stated that the State fell outside the scope of the Act because it was not a "resident" or "citizen of the United States," (which were the statutory requirements for "authorship" back then). The opinion observes that the Court in Banks stated "[w]hether the State could take out a copyright for itself, or could enjoy the benefit of one taken out by an individual for it, as the assignee of a citizen of the United States or a resident therein, who should be the author of a book, is a question not involved in the present case, and we refrain from considering it." The opinion also notes that in Callaghan, the Court, while accepting the principle in Banks, limited its application by concluding that “no [similar] ground of public policy” justified denying a state official a copyright "cover[ing] the matter which is the result of his intellectual labor."
Thomas distinguished judicial opinions from statutes for three reasons:  First, annotations do not embody the will of the people since the General Assembly does not enact statutory annotation under its legislative power(they do not pass through the processes of bicameralism and presentment). They also do not create any binding legal obligations. Second, unlike judges and legislators, the creators of annotations are incentivised by copyright law and profits. Third, while copyrighting judicial opinions and statutes would be contrary to fair notice of the laws, i.e., the legal presumption that every citizen is aware of the law, the same does not apply to annotations since they are non-binding. They state that it is incorrect to hold that without access to annotations readers will be unable to understand the true meaning of the law and the status of the law. This is because, users may directly access court decisions themselves to understand the above. Inability to access the OCGA, therefore, only deprives readers of these additional functions and not the underlying legal information itself.


===== Textual Grounds =====
The decision also questions the origins and the validity of the government edicts doctrine. They highlight four indications within the text of the Copyright Act to support their reading of the precedents: First, the Act does not define the word "author" and neither does it make any reference to the government edicts doctrine. Second, while the Act excludes protection for works prepared by an officer or employee of the Government, the Act does not prohibit protection to works of state governments or works prepared at their behest. Third, the Act notes that annotations are copyrightable derivative works. Fourth, the Act provides that an author may hold a copyright in "material contributed" in a derivative work, "as distinguished from the preexisting material employed in the work."


===== Policy issues =====
The opinion also highlights the difficulties in implementing the decision of the majority since nearly all States with annotated codes contract with private parties to make annotations who are almost invariably under the supervision of the legislative or judicial branch officers. It states that disallowing copyright would result in the creation of an "economy-class" or sub par version of the Code, that would not contain these important annotations. This is because without the means of recuperating the resources spent on research for the annotations, this mechanism of contracting third parties to make annotations available at a fraction of a cost would cease to exist.
It highlights the fact that the majority's decision fails to provide clarity on whether the factors which it used to classify the Commission as adjunct to the legislature (membership, funding etc) are exhaustive or illustrative and whether some factors possess more weight when deciding whether to deem an oversight body a legislative adjunct.


==== Ginsburg ====
The opinion notes that not every work produced by legislators is ineligible for copyright protection and that the government edicts doctrine shields only works that are (1) created by judges and legislators (2) in the course of their judicial and legislative duties. While observing that annotations created by judges are not copyrightable while those created by legislators are, she highlights the difference between the roles of the two – while the judiciary is assigned the duty of interpretation and application of the law, and at times making applicable law, the legislature on the other hand is assigned the role of making laws, instead of construing the statutes after they are enacted.
Justice Ginsburg held that the annotations in the OCGA are not done in a legislative capacity because: First, the annotations are not created contemporaneously with the statutes and merely a commentary on the statutes that have already been enacted. This sets the OCGA annotations apart from uncopyrightable legislative materials like committee reports, generated before a law’s enactment, and tied tightly to the task of law-formulation. Second, annotations are descriptive rather than prescriptive and contain the views of the author on the given statute. Third, annotations are given for the purpose of convenient reference by the public and aim to inform the citizenry at large. Merely because they are considered to be merged with the statutory provisions does not render the annotations to be more than explanatory, referential, or commentarial material.


== See also ==
Edict of government
Veeck v. Southern Building Code Congress Int'l


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Shyamkrishna Balganesh, Long Live the Common Law of Copyright!: Georgia v. Public.Resource.Org, Inc. and the Debate over Judicial Role in Copyright, 121 Colum. L. Rev. Forum 1 (2021)..
Debora Halbert, Expanding the Public Domain after Georgia v. Public.Resource.Org., Inc., 61 IDEA 328 (2021)..
Joseph P. Liu, Who's Afraid of the Common Law? Georgia V. Public.Resource.Org and the Supreme Court's Recent "Straightforward" Copyright Jurisprudence, 67 J. Copyright Soc'y 397 (2020)..
Andy Taylor, Copyright Law Cannot Copyright Law Georgia v. Public Resource Org, Inc., 140 S. Ct. 1498 (2020), 47 Mitchell Hamline L. Rev. 977 (2021)..


== External links ==
Text of Georgia v. Public.Resource.Org, Inc., No. 18-1150, 590 U.S. 255 (2020) is available from: Cornell  CourtListener  Google Scholar  Justia  Oyez (oral argument audio)  Supreme Court (slip opinion)   This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain..
Ancestral domain or ancestral lands are the lands, territories and resources of indigenous peoples, particularly in the Asia-Pacific region. The term differs from indigenous land rights, Aboriginal title or Native Title by directly indicating relationship to land based on ancestry, while domain indicates relationships beyond material lands and territories, including spiritual and cultural aspects that may not be acknowledged in land titles and legal doctrine about trading ownership.


== Concept ==
Indigenous peoples may prefer to be described as custodians or guardians of their ancestral domain or lands rather than as title owners or land owners.
The concept of individual property ownership and land tenure that can be traded was often introduced as part of colonialism. While the Western model of land ownership gives an individual the property right to control land as a commodity, indigenous conceptions have a cultural and spiritual character. They invoke a mutual responsibility and relationship between land and people.
Professor Michael Dodson AM described Aboriginal Australians' idea of country using the term during his Australian of the Year speech. He said:

For us, country is a word for all the values, places, resources, stories and cultural obligations associated with the area and its features. It in fact describes the entirety of our ancestral domains. So when we acknowledge traditional country, as increasingly people do so in Australia, it's no empty ritual: it's to acknowledge who we, the Aboriginal people, are and our place in this nation. In doing that, it seems to me, all Australians might have a clearer notion of who they are and where they stand in relation to their history and the land they live in.


== History ==
The term was used as early as the 1920s in the work of the International Labour Organization (ILO).
Initially, the ILO was concerned with the situation of indigenous and tribal peoples in their roles as workers in the overseas colonies of European powers. It became increasingly evident that indigenous peoples were exposed to severe labour exploitation and had a need for special protection in cases where they were expelled from their ancestral domains only to become seasonal, migrant, bonded or home-based labourers. This recognition led to adoption in 1930 of the ILO's Forced Labour Convention (No. 29).
Following the creation of the United Nations, the ILO with the participation of other parts of the UN system created the Indigenous and Tribal Populations Convention (No. 107). Convention No. 107 was adopted in 1957 as the first international treaty on this subject.
This involved the underlying assumption that the only possible future for indigenous and tribal peoples was integration into larger society, and that the state should make decisions regarding indigenous development. In 1986 an ILO committee of experts concluded that "the integrationist approach of the Convention was obsolete and that its application was detrimental in the modern world."
In 1988 and 1989, the revision of Convention No. 107 was on the agenda of the International Labour Conference (ILC) and in June 1989, the Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention (No. 169) was adopted.
This paved the way for the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples in 2007.


== Documentation ==
Indigenous peoples in Asia have used community mapping to advocate for land rights. This mapping may include documenting sacred sites and immaterial but geographically-linked traditional knowledge of land.


== Regional contexts ==


=== Indonesia ===
In 2013, the Indonesian Constitutional Court amended the 1999 Law on Forestry to return land rights to indigenous peoples whose ancestral lands are forested.
In Indonesia, there have been many land conflicts regarding indigenous community territories in resource-rich Kalimantan. According to data quoted in the Jakarta Post, following the enactment of the Masterplan for the Acceleration and Expansion of Indonesian Economic Development (MP3EI) in 2011, some 135 communities became involved in conflict with businesses. Many conflicts involve indigenous peoples' traditional cultures being uprooted by palm oil plantations, or logging or mining interests.
NGOs in Indonesia set up the Ancestral Domain Registration Agency. A community mapper said the agency was created to "be prepared for the court ruling. If it the Constitutional Court ruled that customary forests belonged to indigenous peoples, we wanted to be able to show where those customary forests were located."


=== Canada ===

The common term in Canada is "traditional territory".  This can refer the entire homeland of a large ethnic group or the particular hunting and trapping grounds of a small band society.  In areas where treaties have been signed, it refers to the land outside of Indian reserves in which a particular indigenous nation still claims an interest.  In the case of specific rights to hunt and fish in a territory, these are called "aboriginal rights" and are a separate legal category from "treaty rights".  In the case of areas where there are no treaties, such as most of British Columbia, the Supreme Court of Canada has ruled that aboriginal title applies to the entirety of a nation's claimed homeland, and not just to the particular locations of villages and other intensely-used sites.  This was a unanimous ruling by the court in the 2017 case Tsilhqot'in Nation v British Columbia.  However, in that same year, the Canadian court rejected the spiritual use of a site as being sufficient to establish aboriginal title, in Ktunaxa Nation v British Columbia (Forests, Lands and Natural Resource Operations).


=== Philippines ===
In the Philippines, the term is used to refer to indigenous peoples' land rights in law. Ancestral lands are referred to in the Philippines Constitution. Article XII, Section 5 says: "The State, subject to the provisions of this Constitution and national development policies and programs, shall protect the rights of indigenous cultural communities to their ancestral lands to ensure their economic, social, and cultural well-being."
The Indigenous People's Rights Act of 1997 recognizes the right of Indigenous peoples to manage their ancestral domains. The law defines ancestral domain to include lands, inland waters, coastal areas, and natural resources owned or occupied by Indigenous peoples, by themselves or through their ancestors.
The Food and Agriculture Organization's research on forest land ownership in the Philippines found conflicts in institutional mandates among the Local Government Code, mining law and the National Integrated Protected Areas Act, and recommended exclusive resource use rights to community-based forest management communities.


== See also ==
Free, prior and informed consent


== Notes ==.
In real estate, air rights are the property interest in the "space" above the Earth's surface. Generally speaking, owning or renting land or a building includes the right to use and build in the space above the land without interference by others.
This legal concept is encoded in the Latin phrase Cuius est solum, eius est usque ad coelum et ad inferos ("Whoever owns the soil, it is theirs up to Heaven and down to Hell."), which appears in medieval Roman law and is credited to 13th-century glossator Accursius; it was notably popularized in common law in Commentaries on the Laws of England (1766) by William Blackstone; see origins of phrase for details. In the 20th century, the splitting of air-rights from the underlying property became an important issue for property development, particularly for skyscrapers in some crowded cities.


== Air travel ==

Property rights defined by points on the ground once extended indefinitely upward. This notion remained unchallenged before air travel became popular in the early 20th century. To promote air transport, legislators established a public easement for transit at high altitudes, regardless of real estate ownership.
New technologies have again raised questions about ownership of "space" and the upward bounds of national sovereignty. With the advent of space travel above Earth's atmosphere, the height at which national sovereignty extends and therefore nations can regulate transit is often debated.


=== United States ===

In the United States, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) has the sole authority to regulate all "navigable airspace" exclusively determining the rules and requirements for its use. Specifically, the Federal Aviation Act provides that: "The United States Government has exclusive sovereignty of airspace of the United States" and "A citizen of the United States has a public right of transit through the navigable airspace." The "navigable airspace" in which the public has a right of transit has been defined as "the airspace at or above the minimum altitudes of flight that includes the airspace needed to ensure safety in the takeoff and landing of aircraft."
The exact altitude(s) at which the airspace over private land can become subject to "substantial impairment" is often debated. Case law in the past has used the height of 500 ft (150 m) in urban or suburban areas, and 360 ft (110 m) above the surface or tallest structure in rural areas as the demarcation of where impairment of property rights can occur. At those times, this constituted the limits of "navigable airspace". However, the bulk of more recent decisions, which take precedent, hold that taking can occur regardless of if the flight occurred within navigable airspace or not and only impairment of property need be considered. This is especially important as some aircraft (crewed and uncrewed) now have no minimum flight altitudes making virtually all airspace "navigable".
Financial compensation is owed property owners when the use of their property is substantially impaired by the federal government or by state government, or by the aerial trespasser.
Congress has provided authority for the FAA to provide funds to purchase property interests in airspace (navigation easements) near airports to accommodate planes taking off and landing.
The advent of low-cost unmanned aerial vehicles (also called drones) in the 2000s re-raised legal questions regarding whose permission is required to fly at low altitudes: the landowner, the FAA, or both. There has never been a direct challenge to the federal government's vesting of the right for citizens to travel through navigable airspace. As such, the status quo is only permission from the FAA (through regulation) is required. However, existing property rights over private property still allow for civil claims of taking when property use is "substantially impaired" by the use of the airspace. The FAA has also reiterated that it has sole authority to regulate this right.
The owner of the land has the exclusive development rights in the 'space' above their land. Under common law, building a 'hangover' that breaks the vertical plane of a neighbor's property is a trespass and the property owner has the right to remove the offending structure. The airspace is property and retains developmental rights which can be sold or transferred. Thus in a dense downtown area, each building owner in the area may have the right to thirty-five stories of airspace above their own property. In one possible scenario, owners of an older building of only three stories high could make a great deal of money by selling their building and allowing a thirty-five-story skyscraper to be built in its place. In a different scenario, a skyscraper developer may purchase the unused airspace from an adjacent landowner in order to develop a broader building. In November 2005, Christ Church in New York sold its vertical development rights for a record $430 per square foot, making more than $30 million on the sale for the right to build in the space over its building.


=== United Kingdom ===
Airspace around a property in most of the United Kingdom is divided into the "lower stratum" and "upper stratum". The lower stratum is the area around and above a property that the owner can expect to reasonably enjoy - in other words, interference by others into this area is usually deemed an act of trespass. This can include overhanging trees or signage from a neighbouring property, or movement such as a crane swinging overhead. However the right to enjoy this airspace is not an automatic right to build into that space without planning permission.
The upper stratum is the space above which ordinary use and enjoyment by the property owner is reasonable, and is loosely defined in the Section 76 Civil Aviation Act 1982 as starting between 500 and 1,000 feet (150 and 300 m) above the roof level of the property. In England, Wales and Northern Ireland, property owners have no rights to the upper stratum, but in Scotland the rights are generally extended a coelo usque ad centrum (from the sky to the centre).
The sale of air rights in the UK is generally unusual but it is legal, and becoming increasingly common.


== Railroads and air rights ==
Railroads were the first companies to realize the potential of making money from their air rights. A good example of this is Grand Central Terminal in New York City, where William J. Wilgus, chief engineer of the New York Central and Hudson River Railroad, devised a plan to earn profit from air rights. At first, the railroad simply constructed a platform above the rail yards to allow for the construction of buildings overhead. By 1954, the railroad began to realize it could sell more air rights and Grand Central Terminal was proposed to be replaced by a 50-story tower. The MetLife Building came to be built next to the station, after public protest regarding the original plan to demolish the terminal. This approach has been used in Chicago since the construction of what is now Riverside Plaza in 1929, as well as Prudential Building in 1955 above active railroad tracks of the Illinois Central Railroad. In 2017, to the west of the Chicago River, River Point and 150 North Riverside were built above tracks leading to the Amtrak station.
Building on platforms over railroad tracks is still potentially very profitable. In the mid-2000s, New York's Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA) attempted to sell air rights to the New York Jets so that they could build the West Side Stadium over Manhattan's West Side Yard, near Penn Station, as part of the Hudson Yards Redevelopment. The Hudson Yards mega-development was eventually built over the rail yard. In Brooklyn, the Barclays Center and Pacific Park have been constructed over Atlantic Yards.


== Roads and air rights ==
Similar to railroads, builders of highways have proposed selling their air rights; Boston did this in connection with the Big Dig.
The city of Los Angeles funded a $100,000 feasibility study RFP in January 2007 to explore building a freeway cap park in Hollywood. The park would be built above US highway 101 and contain 24 acres (97,000 m2) of new parkland.


== See also ==


== References ==
Notes


== External links ==
Types of development rights
Air rights over Chicago's Merchandise Mart (an early example of air rights regulation)
Can I declare a "no-flight zone" over my house?, The Straight Dope, 13 February 1998.
New York City Air Rights Map
Herships, Sally (18 November 2013). "The Air Up There". Marketplace. Archived from the original on 22 November 2013. Retrieved 18 November 2013. On the current state of New York City's air rights and their market.
Troy A. Rule, Airspace and the Takings Clause, 90 Washington University Law Review 421 (2012).
Transferable Development Rights (TDR)

Explanation of this concept from Eastern Michigan University
Explanation of this concept from Ohio State University
TDR "Field Guide"
Transfer of Development Rights for Balanced Development from Lincoln Institute of Land.
An exclusive right, or exclusivity, is a de facto, non-tangible prerogative existing in law (that is, the power or, in a wider sense, right) to perform an action or acquire a benefit and to permit or deny others the right to perform the same action or to acquire the same benefit. Exclusive rights are a form of monopoly.
Exclusive rights can be established by law or by contractual obligation, but the scope of enforceability will depend upon the extent to which others are bound by the instrument establishing the exclusive right; thus in the case of contractual rights, only persons that are parties to a contract will be affected by the exclusivity.
Exclusive rights may be granted in property law, copyright law, patent law,  in relation to public utilities, or, in some jurisdictions, in other sui generis legislation. Many scholars argue that such rights form the basis for the concepts of property and ownership.
Privately granted rights, created by contract. Contract killing, may occasionally appear very similar to exclusive rights, but are only enforceable against the grantee, and not the world at large.
A "prerogative" is in effect an exclusive right. The term is restricted for use for official state or sovereign (i.e., constitutional) powers.


== Types of exclusive rights ==


=== Property ===
In relation to property, an exclusive right will, for the most part, arise when something tangible is acquired; as a result, others are prevented from exercising control of that thing. For example, a person may prohibit others from entering and using their land, or from taking their personal possessions. However, an exclusive right is not necessarily absolute, as an easement may allow a certain level of public access to private property
An exclusivity agreement (also known as a lock-out agreement) may be entered into where two parties are planning the sale of a property but have not yet reached complete agreement or concluded a contract for the sale. The exclusivity agreement will prevent the proposed seller from negotiating a sale with any other potential purchaser for a fixed period of time.


=== Intellectual property ===
Most jurisdictions recognize a bundle of exclusive rights in relation to works of authorship, inventions, and identifications of origin. These rights are sometimes spoken of under the umbrella term "intellectual property."


== History and arguments ==
In common law jurisdictions, exclusive rights have often been the codification of pre-existing social norms with regard to land or chattels.
In the UK case of RCS v Pollard [1983], Ch 135, a claim by the legal owners of an exclusive right in relation to the records of the singer Elvis Presley against a seller of unofficial recordings was lost because selling the unofficial recordings did not interfere with the Presley estate's liberty to exercise their exclusive right.
In continental Europe there is a view that copyrights, patents, and the like are the codification of some kind of moral right, natural right, or personality right. However, such arguments can only be consistently justified through instrumentalism or consequentialism, as exemplified by the reasoning inferred in Article One of the United States Constitution that copyrights and patents exist solely "To promote the Progress of Science and useful Arts".


== See also ==
Moral rights
Natural and legal rights


== References ==.
Personal rights are the rights that a person has over their own body. In the Merriam-Webster Dictionary, personal rights are defined as "rights (as of personal security, personal liberty, and private property) appertaining to the person". Among personal rights are associated rights to protect and safeguard the body, most obviously protected by the torts of assault and battery. Furthermore, aspects of personality, such as a person's reputation and honour, are protected by the tort of defamation, legislation protecting the privacy of individuals, and freedom of movement.
In English land law, a personal right (from the Latin ius in personam) refers to the permission to use land for a specific purpose that is personal to the owner and which cannot bind future purchasers of the land. A personal right is thus distinct from a proprietary (property) right (ius in rem) which refers to a right that affects the land itself, such as a freehold or leasehold.


== References ==


== See also ==
Personality rights
Right to die
Victimless crime
Self defense.
A Vindication of the Rights of Men, in a Letter to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke; Occasioned by His Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) is a political pamphlet, written by the 18th-century British writer and women's rights advocate Mary Wollstonecraft, which attacks aristocracy and advocates republicanism. Wollstonecraft's was the first response in a pamphlet war sparked by the publication of Edmund Burke's Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790), a defense of constitutional monarchy, aristocracy, and the Church of England.
Wollstonecraft attacked not only hereditary privilege, but also the rhetoric that Burke used to defend it. Most of Burke's detractors deplored what they viewed as his theatrical pity for Marie Antoinette, but Wollstonecraft was unique in her love of Burke's gendered language. By saying the sublime and the beautiful, terms first established by Burke himself in A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of Our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful (1756), she kept his rhetoric as well as his argument. In her first unabashedly feminist critique, which Wollstonecraft scholar Claudia Johnson describes as unsurpassed in its argumentative force, Wollstonecraft indicts Burke's justification of an equal society founded on the passivity of women.
In her arguments for republican virtue, Wollstonecraft invokes an emerging middle-class ethos in opposition to what she views as the vice-ridden aristocratic code of manners. Driven by an Enlightenment belief in progress, she derides Burke for relying on tradition and custom. She describes an idyllic country life in which each family has a farm sufficient for its needs. Wollstonecraft contrasts her utopian picture of society, drawn with what she claims is genuine feeling, with Burke's false theatrical tableaux.
The Rights of Men was successful: it was reviewed by every major periodical of the day and the first edition, published anonymously, sold out in three weeks. However, upon the publication of the second edition (the first to carry Wollstonecraft's name on the title page), the reviews began to evaluate the text not only as a political pamphlet but also as the work of a female writer. Most contrasted Wollstonecraft's "passion" with Burke's "reason" and spoke condescendingly of the text and its female author, though others were sympathetic. This remained the prevailing analysis of the Rights of Men until the 1970s, when feminist scholars revisited Wollstonecraft's texts and endeavoured to bring greater attention to their intellectualism.


== Historical context ==


=== Revolution Controversy ===

A Vindication of the Rights of Men was written against the backdrop of the French Revolution and the debates that it provoked in Britain. In a lively and sometimes vicious pamphlet war, now referred to as the Revolution Controversy, which lasted from 1789 until the end of 1795, British political commentators argued over the validity of monarchy. Alfred Cobban has called this debate "perhaps the last real discussion of the fundamentals of politics in [Britain]". The power of popular agitation in revolutionary France, demonstrated in events such as the Tennis Court Oath and the storming of the Bastille in 1789, reinvigorated the British reform movement, which had been largely moribund for a decade. Efforts to reform the British electoral system and to distribute the seats in the House of Commons more equitably were revived.
Much of the vigorous political debate in the 1790s was sparked by the publication of Edmund Burke's Reflections on the Revolution in France in November 1790. Most commentators in Britain expected Burke to support the French revolutionaries, because he had previously been part of the liberal Whig party, a critic of monarchical power, a supporter of the American revolutionaries, and a prosecutor of poor governance in India. When he failed to do so, it shocked the populace and angered his friends and supporters. Burke's book, despite being priced at an expensive three shillings, sold an astonishing 30,000 copies in two years. Thomas Paine's famous response, The Rights of Man (1792), which became the rallying cry for thousands, however, greatly surpassed it, selling upwards of 200,000 copies.
Wollstonecraft's Rights of Men was published only weeks after Burke's Reflections. While Burke supported aristocracy, monarchy, and the Established Church, liberals such as William Godwin, Paine, and Wollstonecraft, argued for republicanism, agrarian socialism, anarchy, and religious toleration. Most of those who came to be called radicals supported similar aims: individual liberties and civic virtue. They were also united in the same broad criticisms: opposition to the bellicose "landed interest" and its role in government corruption, and opposition to a monarchy and aristocracy who they believed were unlawfully seizing the people's power.
1792 was the "annus mirabilis of eighteenth-century radicalism": its most important texts were published and the influence of radical associations, such as the London Corresponding Society (LCS) and the Society for Constitutional Information (SCI), was at its height. However, it was not until these middle- and working-class groups formed an alliance with the genteel Society of the Friends of the People that the government became concerned. After this alliance was formed, the conservative-dominated government prohibited seditious writings. Over 100 prosecutions for sedition took place in the 1790s alone, a dramatic increase from previous decades. The British government, fearing an uprising similar to the French Revolution, took even more drastic steps to quash the radicals: they made ever more political arrests and infiltrated radical groups; they threatened to "revoke the licences of publicans who continued to host politicised debating societies and to carry reformist literature"; they seized the mail of "suspected dissidents"; they supported groups that disrupted radical events; and they attacked Dissidents in the press. Radicals saw this period, which included the 1794 Treason Trials, as "the institution of a system of TERROR, almost as hideous in its features, almost as gigantic in its stature, and infinitely more pernicious in its tendency, than France ever knew."
When, in October 1795, crowds threw refuse at George III and insulted him, demanding a cessation of the war with France and lower bread prices, Parliament immediately passed the "gagging acts" (the Seditious Meetings Act and the Treasonable Practices Act, also known as the "Two Acts"). Under these new laws, it was almost impossible to hold public meetings and speech was severely curtailed at those that were held. British radicalism was effectively muted during the later 1790s and 1800s. It was not until the next generation that any real reform could be enacted.


=== Burke's Reflections ===

Published partially in response to Dissenting clergyman Richard Price's sermon celebrating the French revolution, A Discourse on the Love of Our Country, Burke used the device of a mock-letter to a young Frenchman's plea for guidance in order to defend aristocratic government, paternalism, loyalty, chivalry, and primogeniture.

Burke criticizes many British thinkers and writers who welcomed the early stages of the French Revolution. While the radicals likened the revolution to Britain's own Glorious Revolution in 1688, which had restricted the powers of the monarchy, Burke argues that the appropriate historical analogy was the English Civil War (1642–1651), in which Charles I had been executed in 1649. At the time Burke was writing, however, there had been very little revolutionary violence; more concerned with persuading his readers than informing them, he greatly exaggerated this element of the revolution in his text for rhetorical effect. In his Enquiry into the Sublime and Beautiful, he had argued that "large inexact notions convey ideas best", and to generate fear in the reader, in Reflections he constructs the set-piece of Louis XVI and Marie Antoinette forced from their palace at sword point. When the violence actually escalated in France in 1793 with the Reign of Terror, Burke was viewed as a prophet.
Burke also criticizes the learning associated with the French philosophes; he maintains that new ideas should not, in an imitation of the emerging discipline of science, be tested on society in an effort to improve it, but that populations should rely on custom and tradition to guide them.


=== Composition and publication of the Rights of Men ===
In the advertisement printed at the beginning of the Rights of Men, Wollstonecraft describes how and why she wrote it:

MR. BURKE'S Reflections on the French Revolution first engaged my attention as the transient topic of the day; and reading it more for amusement than information, my indignation was roused by the sophistical arguments, that every moment crossed me, in the questionable shape of natural feelings and common sense.
Many pages of the following letter were the effusions of the moment; but, swelling imperceptibly to a considerable size, the idea was suggested of publishing a short vindication of the Rights of Men.

Not having leisure or patience to follow this desultory writer through all the devious tracks in which his fancy has started fresh game, I have confined my strictures, in a great measure, to the grand principles at which he has levelled many ingenious arguments in a very specious garb.
So the pamphlet could be published as soon as she finished writing it, Wollstonecraft wrote frantically while her publisher Joseph Johnson printed the pages. In fact, Godwin's Memoirs of Wollstonecraft tells that the sheets of manuscript were delivered to the press as they were written. Halfway through the work, however, she ceased writing. One biographer describes it as a "loss of nerve"; Godwin, in his Memoirs, describes it as "a temporary fit of torpor and indolence". Johnson, perhaps canny enough at this point in their friendship to know how to encourage her, agreed to dispose of the book and told her not to worry about it. Ashamed, she rushed to finish.
Wollstonecraft's Rights of Men was published anonymously on 29 November 1790, the first of between fifty and seventy responses to Burke by various authors. Only three weeks later, on 18 December, a second edition, with her name printed on the title page, was issued. Wollstonecraft took time to edit the second edition, which, according to biographer Emily Sunstein, "sharpened her personal attack on Burke" and changed much of the text from first person to third person; "she also added a non-partisan code criticising hypocritical liberals who talk equality but scrape before the powers that be."


== Structure and major arguments ==

Until the 1970s, the Rights of Men was typically considered disorganized, incoherent, illogical, and replete with ad hominem attacks (such as the suggestion that Burke would have promoted the crucifixion of Christ if he were a Jew). It had been touted as an example of "feminine" emotion tilting at "masculine" reason. However, since the 1970s scholars have challenged this view, arguing that Wollstonecraft employed 18th-century modes of writing, such as the digression, to great rhetorical effect. More importantly, as scholar Mitzi Myers argues, "Wollstonecraft is virtually alone among those who answered Burke in eschewing a narrowly political approach for a wide-ranging critique of the foundation of the Reflections." Wollstonecraft makes a primarily moral argument; her "polemic is not a confutation of Burke's political theories, but an exposure of the cruel inequities which those theories presuppose." Wollstonecraft's style was also a deliberate choice, enabling her to respond to Burke's Enquiry into the Sublime and Beautiful as well as to Reflections.
The style of the Rights of Men mirrors much of Burke's own text. It has no clear structure; like Reflections, the text follows the mental associations made by the author as she was writing. Wollstonecraft's political treatise is written, like Burke's, in the form of a letter: his to C. J. F. DePont, a young Frenchman, and hers to Burke himself. Using the same form, metaphors, and style as Burke, she turns his own argument back on him. The Rights of Men is as much about language and argumentation as it is about political theory; in fact, Wollstonecraft claims that these are inseparable. She advocates, as one scholar writes, "simplicity and honesty of expression, and argument employing reason rather than eloquence." At the beginning of the pamphlet, she appeals to Burke: "Quitting now the flowers of rhetoric, let us, Sir, reason together."
The Rights of Men does not aim to present a fully articulated alternative political theory to Burke's, but instead to demonstrate the weaknesses and contradictions in his own argument. Therefore, much of the text is focused on Burke's logical inconsistencies, such as his support of the American revolution and the Regency Bill (which proposed restricting monarchical power during George III's madness in 1788), in contrast to his lack of support for the French revolutionaries. In criticism of Burke's contradictory support of the Regency Bill along with supporting the rule of monarchy in France, she writes:

You were so eager to taste the sweets of power, that you could not wait till time had determined, whether a dreadful delirium would settle into a confirmed madness; but, prying into the secrets of Omnipotence, you thundered out that God had hurled him from his throne, and that it was the most insulting mockery to recollect that he had been a king, or treat him with any particular respect on account of his former dignity…. I have, Sir, been reading, with a scrutinizing, comparative eye, several of your insensible and profane speeches during the King's illness. I disdain to take advantage of a man's weak side, or draw consequences from an unguarded transport—A lion preys not on carcasses! [emphasis Wollstonecraft's]
Wollstonecraft's goal, she writes, is "to shew you [Burke] to yourself, stripped of the gorgeous drapery in which you have enwrapped your tyrannic principles." However, she does also gesture towards a larger argument of her own, focusing on the inequalities faced by British citizens because of the class system. As Wollstonecraft scholar Barbara Taylor writes, "treating Burke as a representative spokesman for old-regime despotism, Wollstonecraft champions the reformist initiatives of the new French government against his 'rusty, baneful opinions', and censures British political elites for their opulence, corruption, and inhumane treatment of the poor."


== Political theory ==


=== Attack against rank and privilege ===
Wollstonecraft's attack on rank and hierarchy dominates the Rights of Men. She chastises Burke for his contempt for the people, whom he dismisses as the "swinish multitude", and berates him for supporting the elite, most notably Marie Antoinette. In a famous passage, Burke had written: "I had thought ten thousand swords must have leaped from their scabbards to avenge even a look that threatened her with insult.—But the age of chivalry is gone."
Contrasting her middle-class values against Burke's aristocratic ones, Wollstonecraft contends that people should be judged on their merits rather than on their birthrights. As Wollstonecraft scholar Janet Todd writes, "the vision of society revealed [in] A Vindication of the Rights of Men was one of talents, where entrepreneurial, unprivileged children could compete on equal terms with the now wrongly privileged." Wollstonecraft emphasizes the benefits of hard work, self-discipline, frugality, and morality, values she contrasts with the "vices of the rich", such as "insincerity" and the "want of natural affections". She endorses a commercial society that would help individuals discover their own potential as well as force them to realize their civic responsibilities. For her, commercialism would be the great equalizing force.
While Dissenting clergyman Richard Price, whose sermon A Discourse on the Love of Our Country helped spark Burke's work, is the villain of Reflections, he is the hero of the Rights of Men. Both Wollstonecraft and Burke associate him with Enlightenment thinking, particularly the notion that civilization could progress through rational debate, but they interpret that stance differently. Burke believed such relentless questioning would lead to anarchy, while Wollstonecraft connected Price with "reason, liberty, free discussion, mental superiority, the improving exercise of the mind, moral excellence, active benevolence, orientation toward the present and future, and the rejection of power and riches"—quintessential middle-class professional values.
Wollstonecraft wields the English philosopher John Locke's definition of property (that is, ownership acquired through labour) against Burke's notion of inherited wealth. She contends that inheritance is one of the major impediments to the progress of European civilization, and repeatedly argues that Britain's problems are rooted in the inequity of property distribution. Although she did not advocate a totally equal distribution of wealth, she did desire one that was more equitable.


=== Republicanism ===

The Rights of Men indicts monarchy and hereditary distinctions and promotes a republican ideology. Relying on 17th- and early 18th-century notions of republicanism, Wollstonecraft maintains that virtue is at the core of citizenship. However, her notion of virtue is more individualistic and moralistic than traditional Commonwealth ideology. The goals of Wollstonecraft's republicanism are the happiness and prosperity of the individual, not the greatest good for the greatest number or the greatest benefits for the propertied. While she emphasizes the benefits that will accrue to the individual under republicanism, she also maintains that reform can only be effected at a societal level. This marks a change from her earlier texts, such as Original Stories from Real Life (1788), in which the individual plays the primary role in social reform.
Wollstonecraft's ideas of virtue revolved around the family, distinguishing her from other republicans such as Francis Hutcheson and William Godwin. For Wollstonecraft, virtue begins in the home: private virtues are the foundation for public virtues. Inspired by Jean-Jacques Rousseau's depictions of the ideal family and the republican Swiss canton, she draws a picture of idyllic family life in a small country village.  One scholar describes her plan this way: "vast estates would be divided into small farms, cottagers would be allowed to make enclosures from the commons and, instead of alms being given to the poor, they would be given the means to independence and self-advancement."


=== Tradition versus revolution ===
One of the central arguments of Wollstonecraft's Rights of Men is that rights should be conferred because they are reasonable and just, not because they are traditional. While Burke argued that civil society and government should rely on traditions which had accrued over centuries, Wollstonecraft contends that all civil agreements are subject to rational reassessment. Precedence, she maintains, is no reason to accept a law or a constitution. As one scholar puts it, "Burke's belief in the antiquity of the British constitution and the impossibility of improvement upon a system that has been tried and tested through time is dismissed as nonsense. The past, for Wollstonecraft, is a scene of superstition, oppression, and ignorance." Wollstonecraft believed powerfully in the Enlightenment notion of progress, and rejected the contention that ancient ideas could not be improved upon. Using Burke's own architectural language, she asks, "why was it a duty to repair an ancient castle, built in barbarous ages, of Gothic materials?" She also notes, pointedly, that Burke's philosophy condones slavery:

[T]he whole tenor of his plausible arguments settles slavery on an everlasting foundation. Allowing his servile reverence for antiquity, and prudent attention to self-interest, to have the force which he insists on, the slave trade ought never to be abolished; and, because our ignorant forefathers, not understanding the native dignity of man, sanctioned a traffic that outrages every suggestion of reason and religion, we are to submit to the inhuman custom, and term an atrocious insult to humanity the love of our country, and a proper submission to the laws by which our property is secured.—Security of property! Behold, in a few words, the definition of English liberty. And to this selfish principle every nobler one is sacrificed.


== Sensibility ==

In the Rights of Men, Wollstonecraft not only endorses republicanism, but also a social contract based on sympathy and fellow-feeling. She describes the ideal society in these terms: individuals, supported by cohesive families, connect with others through rational sympathy. Strongly influenced by Price, whom she had met at Newington Green just a few years earlier, Wollstonecraft asserts that people should strive to imitate God by practicing universal benevolence.
Embracing a reasoned sensibility, Wollstonecraft contrasts her theory of civil society with Burke's, which she describes as full of pomp and circumstance and riddled with prejudice. She attacks what she perceives as Burke's false feeling, countering with her own genuine emotion. She argues that to be sympathetic to the French revolution (i.e., the people) is humane while to sympathize with the French clergy, as Burke does, is a mark of inhumanity. She accuses Burke not only of insincerity, but also of manipulation, claiming that his Reflections is propaganda. In one of the most dramatic moments of the Rights of Men, Wollstonecraft claims to be moved beyond Burke's tears for Marie Antoinette and the monarchy of France to silence for the injustice suffered by slaves, a silence she represents with dashes meant to express feelings more authentic than Burke's:

Man preys on man; and you mourn for the idle tapestry that decorated a gothic pile, and the dronish bell that summoned the fat priest to prayer. You mourn for the empty pageant of a name, when slavery flaps her wing, and the sick heart retires to die in lonely wilds, far from the abodes of men....Why is our fancy to be appalled by terrific perspectives of a hell beyond the grave?—Hell stalks abroad;—the lash resounds on the slave's naked sides; and the sick wretch, who can no longer earn the sour bread of unremitting labour, steals to a ditch to bid the world a long good night—or, neglected in some ostentatious hospital, breathes his last amidst the laugh of mercenary attendants.
Such misery demands more than tears—I pause to recollect myself; and smother the contempt I feel rising for your rhetorical flourishes and infantine sensibility.
---------------

---------------


== Gender and aesthetics ==

In the Rights of Men, Wollstonecraft challenges Burke's rhetoric as much as, or more, than his political theory. She begins by redefining the sublime and the beautiful, terms he had established in his Enquiry into the Sublime and Beautiful. While Burke associates the beautiful with weakness and femininity, and the sublime with strength and masculinity, Wollstonecraft writes, "for truth, in morals, has ever appeared to me the essence of the sublime; and, in taste, simplicity the only criterion of the beautiful." With this sentence, she calls into question Burke's gendered definitions; convinced that they are harmful, she argues later in the Rights of Men:

You may have convinced [women] that littleness and weakness are the very essence of beauty; and that the Supreme Being, in giving women beauty in the most supereminent  [sic] degree, seemed to command them, by the powerful voice of Nature, not to cultivate the moral virtues that might chance to excite respect, and interfere with the pleasing sensations they were created to inspire. Thus confining truth, fortitude, and humanity, within the rigid pale of manly morals, they might justly argue, that to be loved, woman's high end and great distinction! they should 'learn to lisp, to totter in their walk, and nick-name God's creatures.' Never, they might repeat after you, was any man, much less a woman, rendered amiable by the force of those exalted qualities, fortitude, justice, wisdom, and truth; and thus forewarned of the sacrifice they must make to those austere, unnatural virtues, they would be authorised to turn all their attention to their persons, systematically neglecting morals to secure beauty.
As Wollstonecraft scholar Claudia Johnson has written, "As feminist critique, these passages have never really been surpassed." Burke, Wollstonecraft maintains, describes womanly virtue as weakness, thus leaving women no substantive roles in the public sphere and relegating them to uselessness.
Wollstonecraft applies this feminist critique to Burke's language throughout the Reflections. As Johnson argues, "her pamphlet as a whole refutes the Burkean axiom 'to make us love our country, our country ought to be lovely'"; Wollstonecraft successfully challenges Burke's rhetoric of the beautiful with the rhetoric of the rational. She also demonstrates how Burke embodies the worst of his own ideas. He becomes the hysterical, illogical, feminine writer, and Wollstonecraft becomes the rational, masculine writer. Ironically, in order to effect this transposition, Wollstonecraft herself becomes passionate at times, for example, in her description of slavery (quoted above).


== Reception and legacy ==

The Rights of Men was successful, its price contributing in no small measure: at one shilling and sixpence it was half the price of Burke's book. After the first edition sold out, Wollstonecraft agreed to have her name printed on the title page of the second. It was her first extensive work as "a self-supporting professional and self-proclaimed intellectual", as scholar Mary Poovey writes, and:

took the form that most people would have considered the least appropriate for a woman—the political disquisition. Requiring knowledge of government (in which women had no share), analytical ability (of which women theoretically had little), and the ambition to participate directly in contemporary events (of which women were supposed to have none), political disquisition was in every sense a masculine domain.
Commentaries from the time note this; Horace Walpole, for example, called her a "hyena in petticoats" for attacking Marie Antoinette. William Godwin, her future husband, described the book as illogical and ungrammatical; in his Memoirs of Wollstonecraft, he dedicated only a paragraph to a discussion of the content of the work, calling it "intemperate".
All the major periodicals of the day reviewed the Rights of Men. The Analytical Review agreed with Wollstonecraft's arguments and praised her "lively and animated remarks". The Monthly Review was also sympathetic, but it pointed out faults in her writing. The Critical Review, the "sworn foe" of the  Analytical Review, however, wrote in December 1790, after discovering that the author was a woman:

It has been observed in an old play, that minds have no sex; and in truth we did not discover this Defender of the Rights of Man to be a Woman. The second edition, however, which often reveals secrets, has attributed this pamphlet to Mrs. Wollstonecraft, and if she assumes the disguise of a man, she must not be surprised that she is not treated with the civility and respect that she would have received in her own person. As the article was written before we saw the second edition, we have presented an acknowledgement of this kind to the necessary alterations. It would not have been sufficient to have corrected merely verbal errors: a Lady should have been addressed with more respect. [emphasis in original]
The Gentleman's Magazine followed suit, criticizing the book's logic and "its absurd presumption that men will be happier if free", as well as Wollstonecraft's own presumption in writing on topics outside of her proper domain, commenting "the rights of men asserted by a fair lady! The age of chivalry cannot be over, or the sexes have changed their ground." However, the Rights of Men put Wollstonecraft on the map as a writer; from this point forward in her career, she was well known.
Wollstonecraft sent a copy of the book to the historian Catharine Macaulay, whom she greatly admired. Macaulay wrote back that she was "still more highly pleased that this publication which I have so greatly admired from its pathos & sentiment should have been written by a woman and thus to see my opinion of the powers and talents of the sex in your pen so early verified." William Roscoe, a Liverpool lawyer, writer, and patron of the arts, liked the book so much that he included Wollstonecraft in his satirical poem The Life, Death, and Wonderful Achievements of Edmund Burke:

While most of the early reviewers of the Rights of Men, as well as most of Wollstonecraft's early biographers, criticized the work's emotionalism, and juxtaposed it with Burke's masterpiece of logic, there has been a recent re-evaluation of her text. Since the 1970s, critics who have looked more closely at both her work and Burke's, have come to the conclusion that they share many rhetorical similarities, and that the masculine/logic and feminine/emotion binaries are unsupportable. Most Wollstonecraft scholars now recognize it was this work that radicalized Wollstonecraft and directed her future writings, particularly A Vindication of the Rights of Woman. It is not until after the halfway point of Rights of Men that she begins the dissection of Burke's gendered aesthetic; as Claudia Johnson contends, "it seems that in the act of writing the later portions of Rights of Men she discovered the subject that would preoccupy her for the rest of her career."
Two years later, when Wollstonecraft published the Rights of Woman, she extended many of the arguments she had begun in Rights of Men. If all people should be judged on their merits, she wrote, women should be included in that group. In both texts, Wollstonecraft emphasizes that the virtue of the British nation is dependent on the virtue of its people. To a great extent, she collapses the distinction between private and public and demands that all educated citizens be offered the chance to participate in the public sphere.


== See also ==
Timeline of Mary Wollstonecraft
Mary Wollstonecraft
A Vindication of the Rights of Woman


== Notes ==


=== Bibliography ===


==== Primary sources ====
Burke, Edmund. Reflections on the Revolution in France. Ed. Conor Cruise O'Brien. New York: Penguin Books, 1986. ISBN 0-14-043204-3.
Butler, Marilyn, ed. Burke, Paine, Godwin, and the Revolution Controversy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002. ISBN 0-521-28656-5.
Godwin, William. Memoirs of the Author of A Vindication of the Rights of Woman. Eds. Pamela Clemit and Gina Luria Walker. Peterborough: Broadview Press, 2001. ISBN 1-55111-259-0.
Wollstonecraft, Mary. The Complete Works of Mary Wollstonecraft. Ed. Janet Todd and Marilyn Butler. 7 vols. London: William Pickering, 1989. ISBN 0-8147-9225-1.
Wollstonecraft, Mary. The Vindications: The Rights of Men and The Rights of Woman. Eds. D.L. Macdonald and Kathleen Scherf. Toronto: Broadview Literary Texts, 1997. ISBN 1-55111-088-1.


==== Contemporary reviews ====
Analytical Review 8 (1790): 416–419.
Critical Review 70 (1790): 694–696.
English Review 17 (1791): 56–61.
General Magazine and Impartial Review 4 (1791): 26–27.
Gentleman's Magazine 61.1 (1791): 151–154.
Monthly Review New Series 4 (1791): 95–97.
New Annual Register 11 (1790): 237.
Universal Magazine and Review 5 (1791): 77–78.
Walker's Hibernian Magazine 1 (1791): 269–271 [copied from the Gentleman's Magazine]


==== Secondary sources ====
Barrell, John and Jon Mee, eds. "Introduction". Trials for Treason and Sedition, 1792–1794. 8 vols. London: Pickering and Chatto, 2006–7. ISBN 978-1-85196-732-2.
Furniss, Tom. "Mary Wollstonecraft's French Revolution". The Cambridge Companion to Mary Wollstonecraft. Ed. Claudia L. Johnson. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002. ISBN 0-521-78952-4.
Johnson, Claudia L. Equivocal Beings: Politics, Gender, and Sentimentality in the 1790s. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995. ISBN 0-226-40184-7.
Jones, Chris. "Mary Wollstonecraft's Vindications and their political tradition". The Cambridge Companion to Mary Wollstonecraft. Ed. Claudia L. Johnson. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002. ISBN 0-521-78952-4.
Keen, Paul. The Crisis of Literature in the 1790s: Print Culture and the Public Sphere. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999. ISBN 0-521-65325-8.
Kelly, Gary. Revolutionary Feminism: The Mind and Career of Mary Wollstonecraft. New York: St. Martin's, 1992. ISBN 0-312-12904-1.
Myers, Mitzi. "Politics from the Outside: Mary Wollstonecraft's First Vindication". Studies in Eighteenth-Century Culture 6 (1977): 113–32.
Paulson, Ronald. Representations of Revolution, 1789–1820. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1983. ISBN 0-300-02864-4.
Poovey, Mary. The Proper Lady and the Woman Writer. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984. ISBN 0-226-67528-9.
Sapiro, Virginia. A Vindication of Political Virtue: The Political Theory of Mary Wollstonecraft. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992. ISBN 0-226-73491-9.
Sunstein, Emily. A Different Face: the Life of Mary Wollstonecraft. Boston: Little, Brown and Co., 1975. ISBN 0-06-014201-4.
Taylor, Barbara. Mary Wollstonecraft and the Feminist Imagination. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003. ISBN 0-521-66144-7.
Todd, Janet. Mary Wollstonecraft: A Revolutionary Life. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 2000. ISBN 0-231-12184-9.
Wardle, Ralph M. Mary Wollstonecraft: A Critical Biography. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1951.


== External links ==
A Vindication of the Rights of Men from Wikisource.
Full text of Rights of Men Archived 26 January 2021 at the Wayback Machine at the Online Library of Liberty
 Vindication of the Rights of Men public domain audiobook at LibriVox
Mary Wollstonecraft: A 'Speculative and Dissenting Spirit' by Janet Todd at www.bbc.co.uk.
The Albany Law Journal of Science and Technology (Bluebook abbreviation: Alb. L.J. Sci. & Tech.) is a triannual law journal edited by students at Albany Law School. It was established in 1990 and covers legal issues involving science and technology. The journal also organizes an annual symposia.


== Membership ==
Members are students at Albany Law School. Students become eligible for journal membership upon completion of their first year of law school. Offers of membership are extended based on student class standing or on the results of a writing competition jointly administered by the school's three student-edited journals.


== Notable symposia ==
Facebook Firing: The Intersection of Social Media, Employment, & Ethics (2013)
Building a High-Tech, 21st Century Economy (2015)


== Past Editors-in-Chief ==
Vol. 35 - Savannah Everson (2025)
Vol. 34 - Natalie Turney (2024)
Vol. 33 - Claire Stratton (2023)
Vol. 32 - Anneliese Aliasso (2022)
Vol. 29 - Daniel Young (2019)
Vol. 27 - Erin Ginty (2017)
Vol. 26 - James Faucher II (2016)
Vol. 25 - Gary J. Repke, Jr. (2015)
Vol. 24 - Elizabeth A. Cappillino (2014)
Vol. 23 - Nadia Isobel Arginteanu (2013)
Vol. 22 - Christina M. French (2012)
Vol. 21 - Caitlin Donovan (2011)
Vol. 20 - Andrew Wilson (2010)
Vol. 19 - William Q. Lowe (2009)


== See also ==
Albany Government Law Review
Albany Law Review
Indian Journal of Law and Technology


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website.
In the context of globalization and the subsequent proliferation of free trade agreements (FTAs), legal scholars generally refer to the political strategy used by a sovereign state to leverage a trade agreement's substantive rules to counter behavior it deems unreasonable by its trading partners, as aggressive legalism.


== Development of aggressive legalism ==
Following World War II and the Bretton Woods Conference, the United States and the Allied Powers designed a new world economic order, partially emphasizing greater cooperative trade relationships. With the adoption of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) in 1946 and via its replacement by the World Trade Organization (WTO) in 1995, these countries developed a comprehensive legal framework, that reflected their common legal traditions, to facilitate these relationships, including a system to settle disputes that favored litigation.
Somewhat under GATT in the 1950s but specifically with the adoption of the WTO, these countries engaged increased trade with Asian countries, as they became signatories.   Initially, while the U.S. and the Allied Powers leveraged the agreement's respective legal frameworks and dispute-mechanisms including litigation to deal with disputes with their trading partners, many Asian countries choose not to. Instead, they avoided legal confrontation, in favor of bilateral negotiations to arrive at a settlement. Social-cultural disparities between each, concerning an inclination to litigate, are likely indicative of why.
However, in the 1980s and 1990s, under both GATT and WTO, many Asian countries began to utilize their legal frameworks to settle disputes.
In 2001, in Aggressive Legalism: The Rules of the WTO and Japan’s Emerging Trade Strategy, Saadia M. Pekkanen described the increasing tendency of the Japanese government's use of the World Trade Organization's (WTO) dispute settlement protocols to counter adverse acts by its trading partners as aggressive legalism. Aggressive legalism, she argued is “a conscious strategy where a substantive set of international legal rules can be made to serve as both ‘shield’ and ‘sword’ in trade disputes among sovereign states.”


== Modern aggressive legalism ==
In a policy primer for the United States Government, The Policymaker's Library wrote that the United States' influence with its Asian trading partners has waned and that an "emphasis on aggressive legalism" affords opportunities to reshape economic relationships going forward.


=== United States ===
The Korea–US Free Trade Agreement (KORUS), reflects a political strategy by both the United States and South Korea of aggressive legalism. That is, both countries agreed to envelope in the agreement binding legal rules to deal with lingering bilateral trade disputes.


=== Asia ===
Following the succession of GATT with the WTO in the 1980s and 1990s, many Asian countries, including China, Japan, and South Korea, shifted to a policy of aggressive legalism, evidenced by each's willingness to use the legal frameworks provided under both to directly engage bilateral trading disputes with their partners.


== References ==.
Legal consciousness is legal awareness of ideas, views, feelings and traditions imbibed through legal socialization; which reflects as legal culture among given individual, or a group, or a given society at large. The legal consciousness evaluates the existing law and also bears in mind an image of the desired or ideal law.
Consciousness is not an individual trait nor solely ideational; legal consciousness is a type of social practice reflecting and forming social structures. The study of legal consciousness documents the forms of participation and interpretation through which act or sustain, reproduce, or amend the circulating contested or hegemonic structures of meanings concerning law. Legal consciousness is the way in which law is experienced and interpreted by specific individuals as they engage, avoid, resist or just assume the law and legal meanings.
Legal consciousness is a state of being, legal socialisation is the process to Legal consciousness; where as legal awareness & legal mobilisation are means to achieve  the same.


== Definition ==
The Great Soviet Encyclopaedia (1979) defined legal consciousness as " the sum of views and ideas expressing the attitude of people toward law, legality, and justice and their concept of what is lawful and unlawful. Legal consciousness is a form of social consciousness. Legal ideology, the system of legal views based on certain social and scientific viewpoints, is a concentrated expression of legal consciousness. The customs and feelings of people in relation to legal phenomena constitute the psychological aspect of legal consciousness; among these are a sense of justice and a loathing of crimes and illegal actions "
Legal consciousness is defined by Ewick and Silbey as the process by which people make sense of their experiences by relying on legal categories and concepts. People do this even when they are not familiar with the details and minutia of law or the legal system. They explain that there are cultural schemas provided by law that people use to make sense of their experiences. They refer to this as legality. The concept of legality includes "the meanings, sources, authority and cultural practices that are commonly recognized as legal, regardless of who employs them or for what ends." These meanings and sources and different ways of knowing and understanding enable people to make sense of what happens to them and what that might mean in terms of their rights and options. This process of understanding legal experiences occurs within a larger ecosystem in which there are disputes over meaning and values. Seron and Munger explain that ""in addition, class may affect legal consciousness: Law may mean different things depending on an individual's location in the various hierarchies of status, prestige, and knowledge associated with membership in a social class.


== History of legal consciousness ==


== Legal consciousness narratives ==

legal consciousness narratives

Before the law
With the law
Against the law


== See also ==
Law
Consciousness
Natural law
Legal positivism
Legal awareness
legal mobilisation
legal socialisation
Legal psychology


== References ==.
An apostolic constitution (Latin: constitutio apostolica) is the most solemn form of legislation issued by the Pope.
By their nature, apostolic constitutions are addressed to the public. Generic constitutions use the title apostolic constitution and treat solemn matters of the church, such as the promulgation of laws or definitive teachings. The forms dogmatic constitution and pastoral constitution are titles sometimes used to be more descriptive as to the document's purpose.
Apostolic constitutions are issued as papal bulls because of their solemn, public form. Among types of papal legislation, apostolic letters issued motu proprio are next in solemnity.


== References ==


=== Citations ===


=== Sources ===
Huels, John M.  "A theory of juridical documents based on canons 29-34", Studia Canonica, 1998, vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 337–370.
Beal, John P., James A. Coriden, Thomas J. Green. New Commentary on the Code of Canon Law: Commissioned by the Canon Law Society of America (New York: Paulist Press, 2000)..
The Real decreto (Spanish for "Royal decree"), in Spanish law, is a regulation issued by the Monarch on the advice of the prime minister or the Council of Ministers, adopted by virtue of its regulatory power. As such, it is hierarchically inferior to the law, although superior to other regulatory norms. The adjective "royal" refers to the fact that, although agreed by the Government, it is always signed by the Sovereign.
While the royal decree is the work of the executive branch, the law is the work of the legislative branch. For its part, the royal decree must be issued at the proposal of the prime minister or the full Government, while other types of regulations, such as the ministerial order, can be approved by a single-person body. Some royal decrees, such as the appointment of the prime minister or, in certain cases, the dissolution of Parliament, are issued at the proposal of the president of the Congress of Deputies.
However, the content must not be confused with the form of approval: the administrative acts of the Council of Ministers also take the form of a royal decree, which is, therefore, the form in which the act takes place, but its content has no normative force.


== See also ==
Letters patent
Royal Decree-Law (Spain)
Royal Legislative Decree (Spain)


== References ==.
The abnormal step approach is a standard for distinguishing between preparation and attempt in a criminal case. If a person takes a series of steps in preparation for a crime, then takes a step that a normal noncriminal person would have come to their good senses and held back from taking (an abnormal step), then that is evidence of an attempt.


== See also ==
Attempt
Inchoate crime


== References ==.
A bargaining unit, in labor relations, is a group of employees with a clear and identifiable community of interests who are (under US law) represented by a single labor union in collective bargaining and other dealings with management. Examples are non-management professors, law enforcement professionals, blue-collar workers, and clerical and administrative employees.  Geographic location and the number of facilities included in bargaining units may be issues during representation cases.
The size of a company does not relate to the size of a bargaining unit. Bargaining units must consist of at least three employees, and must have the support of a majority of employees in the bargaining unit. However, the bargaining unit can be a small portion of a large company if no other employees are members of a union..
A city court or municipal court is a court of law with jurisdiction limited to a city or other municipality. It typically addresses "violations of city ordinances and may also have jurisdiction over minor criminal cases...and over certain civil cases." Examples include Moscow City Court in Russia, Municipal Court of Chicago and New York City Civil Court in the United States.


== See also ==
Legal code (municipal)
County court
District court
Inferior courts of the United States


== References ==.
Corporate dissolution, also known as corporate wind-down, refers to the formal process of closing a business entity. Dissolving a company may take several months, involve legal assistance, incur significant costs, and be emotionally taxing. The need to settle outstanding taxes and liabilities adds to the complexity.
Dissolving a corporation is governed by the laws of the jurisdiction in which the entity is incorporated, and broadly involves ensuring that all legal, financial, and operational obligations are settled before the company ceases to exist.


== See also ==
Bankruptcy
Judicial dissolution
Liquidation


== References ==.
A deed of gift is a signed legal document that voluntarily and without recompense transfers ownership of real, personal, or intellectual property—such as a gift of materials—from one person or institution to another. It should include any possible conditions restricting access, use, or preservation of the gift.


== See also ==
Deed of Gift of the America's Cup
Gift (law)


== References ==.
In law, the duty to settle is an insurer's implied obligation to accept a settlement in a case against one of its insured parties if it is likely that a potential judgement against the insured will exceed policy limits. If a liability insurer exposes the insured to excess risk by failing to settle within policy limits, they may be liable for any damages incurred.


== United States law ==
Liability insurance policies in the United States typically make no express contractual promise to settle.


=== California ===
In California, "an insurer, who wrongfully refuses to accept a reasonable settlement within the policy limits is liable for the entire judgment against the insured even if it exceeds the policy limits." California Insurance Code §790-790.15 states that the insurer has an obligation to attempt "in good faith to effectuate prompt, fair, and equitable settlements of claims in which liability has become reasonably clear."
A rationale for this duty is that "[w]hen an offer is made to settle a claim in excess of policy limits for an amount within policy limits, a genuine and immediate conflict of interest arises between carrier and assured." "An insurer who denies coverage does so at its own risk. Such factors as a belief that the policy does not provide coverage, should not affect a decision as to whether the settlement offer in question is a reasonable one." "It is the duty of the insurer to keep the insured informed of settlement offers." "[A]n insurer potentially can be liable for unreasonably coercing an insured to contribute to a settlement fund."
An insurer may not "discriminate in its claims settlement practices based upon" certain protected classes.


=== Texas ===
The Texas Supreme Court ruled in G. A. Stowers Furniture Co. v. American Indemnity Co., that insurers can be held liable for negligently refusing a settlement within policy limits.


== References ==.
Federal jurisdiction is the jurisdiction of the federal government in any country that uses federalism. Such a country is known as a Federation.


== Federal jurisdiction by country ==
All federations, by definition, must have some form of federal jurisdiction, this will commonly include powers relating to international relations and war. Though power for particular actions varies from one federation to another.

Federal jurisdiction (Canada)
Federal jurisdiction (United States)
Federal jurisdiction (Iraq)


== See also ==
Federation


== References ==.
A grievance (from Latin gravis 'heavy') is a wrong or hardship suffered, real or supposed, which forms legitimate grounds of complaint. In the past, the word meant the infliction or cause of hardship.


== See also ==
Complaint system
Harm
Zemiology


== References ==.
Inhibition (from Latin inhibere, to restrain, prevent), as an English legal term, particularly used in ecclesiastical law, is an act of restraint or prohibition, for a writ from a superior to an inferior court, suspending proceedings in a case under appeal, also for the suspension of a jurisdiction of a bishop's court on the visitation of an archbishop, and for that of an archdeacon on the visitation of a bishop. It is more particularly applied to a form of ecclesiastical censure, suspending an offending clergyman from the performance of any religious service, or other spiritual duty, for the purpose of enforcing obedience to a monition or order of the bishop or judge. Such inhibitions are at the discretion of the ordinary if he considers that scandal might arise from the performance of spiritual duties by the offender (Church Discipline Act 1860, re-enacted by section 10 of the Clergy Discipline Act 1892 (55 & 56 Vict. c. 32)).
By section 5 of the Sequestration Act 1871 (34 & 35 Vict. c. 45), similar powers of inhibition are given where a sequestration remains in force for more than six months, and also, by the Benefices Act 1898 (61 & 62 Vict. c. 48), in cases where a commission reports that the ecclesiastical duties of a benefice are inadequately performed through the negligence of the incumbent.
In modern times, "inhibit(ion)" is a Philippine English variant of recusal or recuse in other English varieties.


== References ==

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Inhibition". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press..
In European legal history and the philosophy of law, the jurisprudence of interests is a doctrine of legal positivism of the early 20th century, according to which a written law must be interpreted to reflect the interests it is to promote. The main proponents of the jurisprudence of interests were Philipp Heck, Rudolf Müller-Erzbach, Arthur F. Bentley and Roscoe Pound.
The school of legal positivism passed through the phase of the jurisprudence of interests after the jurisprudence of concepts. In the jurisprudence of interests, one interprets a law essentially in terms of the purposes it is intended to accomplish. This doctrine is characterized by the idea of obedience to law, and subsumption as the resolution of conflicts of interests in the concrete and in the abstract, whereby the interests necessary to life in society, as materialized in that law, should prevail. It is therefore a distinctly teleological school.


== See also ==
Jurisprudence of values
Jurisprudence of concepts


== References ==.
Law without the state (also called transnational stateless law, stateless law, or private legal orderings)  is law made primarily outside of the power of a state. 
Such law may be established in several ways:

It may emerge in systems such as existed in feudal Europe prior to the emergence of the modern nation state with the treaty of Westphalia.
It can be established as customary law such as that practiced by indigenous communities.
Non-state actors may create it, for instance in the form of "soft law".
According to various theories of anarchist law, it could result from how a society would organize itself without formal government.


== See also ==
List of national legal systems – System for interpreting and enforcing the laws
Religious law – Ethical and moral codes taught by religious traditions
Islamic Courts Union – Somali legal and political organization (2000–2009)
Beth Din – Rabbinical court of JudaismPages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets
Kris (Romani court) – Romani traditional court
Jirga – Assembly of Pashtun tribal leaders
Lex Mercatoria – Part of the history of contract lawPages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets


== References ==.
A licence to use or LTU is a licence to use an intellectual property such as a patent or trademark.  This is distinct from other types of licence such as a licence to manufacture or copy the invention or design.  It is the sort of licence commonly issued for the use of computer software.


== References ==.
A monetary judgment (also called a money judgment or award) is a form of judgment rendered by a court or comparable determinative body in which one party to a dispute is awarded some amount of money as compensation for wrongdoing by the other party. Monetary judgments can contain a number of elements, including attorney's fees and  punitive damages.


== Right to recover ==
When a court renders a judgment, it may state that the successful party has a right to recover money or property. However, the court will not collect the money or property on behalf of the successful party without further action. In common law legal systems, judgment enforcement is regulated by administrative divisions such as a province, territory, or federated state, while in civil law legal systems judgment enforcement is regulated through the national Code of Civil Procedure. Judgment enforcement, on a conceptual level, is conducted in a similar way across different legal systems. Specific references to the judgment enforcement rules of Germany, Canada (Saskatchewan), and the United States (California) are made in this section. In the Australian state of Victoria, the sheriff's office enforces unpaid money judgments in civil matters, with various enforcement powers against judgment debtors; they may seize and sell a debtor's assets to satisfy a judgment, place a wheel clamp on a debtor's car, or direct VicRoads to suspend a debtor's driver's license or vehicle registration.
The successful party may receive immediate payment from the unsuccessful party on the basis of the judgment and not require further action. A successful party who does not receive immediate payment must initiate a judgment enforcement process in order to collect the money or property that they are entitled to under the judgment. Once this process is initiated, the successful party may be referred to as the judgment creditor while the unsuccessful party will be referred to as the judgment debtor in North America.
Judgment creditors can register their judgments through the property registry system in their jurisdictions, levy the property in question through a writ of execution, or seek a court order for enforcement depending on the options available in their jurisdiction.
Judgment creditors may also need to investigate whether judgment debtors are capable of paying. Understanding whether a judgment debtor is capable of fulfilling the judgment order may affect the enforcement mechanism used to recover the money or property. Some steps are available in different jurisdictions to investigate or interview judgment creditors, and investigations may be conducted either by the judgment creditor or by a sheriff or bailiff.
Different enforcement mechanisms exist, including seizure and sale of the judgment debtor's property or garnishment. Some jurisdictions, like California, also allow for additional enforcement mechanisms depending on the circumstances, such as suspending the judgment debtor's driver's license or professional license. In Germany, a bailiff is responsible for enforcing the judgment and is empowered to use a number of different enforcement mechanisms.
In Germany, the judgment creditor is entitled to enforce the judgment 30 years past the judgment date. In California and Saskatchewan, the judgment creditor is entitled to enforce the judgment 10 years past the judgment date subject to exceptions that allow the judgment creditor to renew the enforcement for an additional 10 years.


== Release of judgments ==
Depending on the jurisdiction, the judgment debtor may be able to obtain a "satisfaction and release of judgment" document from the judgment creditor. This document affirms that the judgment debtor has fulfilled any obligations relating to the judgment.
For example, in California, a judgment creditor must file an "Acknowledgment of Satisfaction of Judgment" where it has been paid in full by the judgment debtor within 15 days of the judgment debtor's request. This document has the effect of formally closing the case and terminating any ongoing garnishment arrangements or liens. In Saskatchewan, upon either the satisfaction or withdrawal of a judgment, a judgment debtor can seek a discharge of judgment. If successful, the judgment is removed from the Judgment Registry and detached from any property registered on the Personal Property registry, titles, or interests in land.


== Offsets ==
An offset in law, is a reduction in the amount of a judgment granted to a losing party based on debts owed by the prevailing party to the losing party. For example, if an employee successfully sued an employer for wrongful termination, the employer might be entitled to an offset if the employer could demonstrate that it had previously made an overpayment to that employee which had not been returned. A party may similarly be entitled to an offset where it can demonstrate that the prevailing party has already received compensation for its injuries through insurance, a judgment against another party liable for those injuries, or some other source.


== References ==.
Overcharging, in law, refers to a prosecutorial practice that involves "tacking on" additional charges that the prosecutor knows cannot proven. It is used to put the prosecutor in a better plea bargaining position.  The term has been defined in different ways. Alschuler writes that "to prosecutors, overcharging is accusing the defendant of a crime of which he is clearly innocent to induce a plea to the 'proper' crime. Defense counsel identify two types of overcharging. 'Horizontal' overcharging is the unreasonable multiplying of accusations against a single defendant. He may be either charged with a separate offense for every technical criminal transaction in which he participated, or the prosecutor may fragment a single criminal transaction into numerous component offenses. 'Vertical' overcharging is charging a single offense at a higher level than the circumstances of the case seem to warrant." Vertical overcharging is deemed to be the more abusive of the two practices. In defense of overcharging, it has been argued that in order to obtain a plea bargain that results in a lower sentence than the prosecutor's original position, while still obtaining a penalty that promotes public safety, the prosecutor must select an initial charge higher than is penologically appropriate.
Although theoretically overcharging is impermissible, courts are reluctant to dismiss charges that are supported by probable cause. American Bar Association guidelines discourage overcharging, but do not prohibit it. It has been said that rules aimed at combating prosecutorial vindictiveness that force prosecutors to justify any distinct indictments brought subsequent to an initial charge raise the possibility of overcharging. It has been argued that restrictions on the current practice of plea bargaining would most likely result in a reduction in overcharging by the prosecutor.


== References ==.
Pelman v. McDonald's Corporation was a court case involving a group of New York City teenagers who claimed that the fast food from  McDonald's caused their obesity.
The plaintiffs, Ashley Pelman, 14, and Jazlyn Bradley, 19, among others, said they did not know how fattening the food was and complained of high blood pressure and high cholesterol, among other ailments. One plaintiff, a 600-pound 15-year-old, said he ate McDonald's everyday. Lawyers argued advertising to children helped foster a trust of the food's nutritional value.
Judge Robert W. Sweet dismissed the case in 2003 and said "it is not the place of the law to protect them against their own excesses". However, the plaintiffs appealed to United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, and in 2005 the circuit court vacated the district court's dismissal and reinstated some of the claims as incorrectly dismissed. 
Ultimately, the lawsuit failed when it was denied class-action status in 2010.


== See also ==
Compensation culture
McDonald's legal cases
Liebeck v. McDonald's Restaurants


== References ==


== External links ==
Ultra-Processed Foods—Running for Cover(age)  Food Safety magazine, April 14, 2025.
A preferred charge is an interim step in the United States' military justice system.
According to Jonathan Turley, a law professor at George Washington University, testifying before the Senate Intelligence Committee, the US military justice system equivalent of a formal charge is only leveled following the recommendation of an article 32 hearing -- a hearing held under the authority of article 32 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice.


== References ==.
The progress toward degree rule, commonly referred to as the 40-60-80 rule, is a piece of National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) legislation designed to increase retention and graduation rates of NCAA Division I student athletes.  The legislation, that took effect for first time freshmen in 2003, states that by the beginning of the student-athlete's third year of college enrollment, they must have completed 40% of the classes required toward a specific degree.  This rate of progress toward a specific degree must continue so that by the beginning of the student-athlete's fourth year, they must have completed 60% and by the beginning of their fifth year, they must have completed 80% of their required coursework toward a specific degree.  This legislation, part of many academically oriented rules the NCAA has put into place over the past 20 years, was written in response to several calls for reform of "big time" college athletics including, most notably, the Knight Commission.


== See also ==
Perpetual student


== References ==.
Regulatory law refers to secondary legislation, including regulations, promulgated by an executive branch agency under a delegation from a legislature; as well as legal issues related to regulatory compliance. It contrasts with statutory law promulgated by the legislative branch, and common law or case law promulgated by the judicial branch.
Regulatory law also refers to the law that governs conduct of administrative agencies (both promulgation of regulations, and adjudication of applications or disputes), and judicial review of agency decisions, usually called administrative law. Administrative law is promulgated by the legislature (and refined by judicial common law) for governing agencies.
The administrative agencies create procedures to regulate applications, licenses, appeals and decision making. In the United States, the Administrative Procedure Act is responsible for all federal agency policies.


== References ==.
A school district solicitor is a type of solicitor general appointed by a local school district to represent the school district's legal interests and advise the district's governing body in the proper operation of the school district. The types of matters handled by school district solicitors can vary significantly, and often include drafting and making recommendations on policies; assisting with labor and employment matters; drafting and reviewing contracts for supplies, construction projects, real estate and more; representing schools in litigation; and assuring compliance with state and federal regulations governing the operation of schools.
Most local school districts are not sovereign entities, but instead get power from whatever state law creates them. In recent decades, state and federal laws regulating public school districts have become increasingly complex.


== Qualifications and background ==
In most jurisdictions of the United States, a school district solicitor must be a practicing lawyer.  There generally is no special license or other registration required.  Often, a school district solicitor will work in a private law firm, and the school district will contract with the lawyer or firm for the services.  In more rare instances, particularly with larger school entities, the school district may employ its own in-house counsel to act as solicitor.


== Professional associations ==
School district solicitors  have created a number of professional associations for networking and professional development.  For example, the National School Boards Association (NSBA), which is a national advocacy organization made up of school boards from all over the United States, has an affiliated entity known as the Council of School Attorneys (COSA) similarly made up of school district solicitors from throughout the United States. Each state also has a state association of school district solicitors, often also associated with that state's school boards association.


== References ==.
Smell rights are claims of ownership to particular smells. These rights can include copyright or non-conventional trademark.
In France, the scent of a perfume is not eligible for copyright.
In 2006, a Dutch court ruled that a perfume could have a copyright. The case was a claim of French cosmetics company, Lancôme, on the property of the scent of its perfume Trésor against the version of such fragance done by the Dutch firm Kecofa. The Dutch High court granted the protection given that scent as long as it is perceptible and original.
Legal commentators have described possible systems for trademarking scents. WIPO has collected information on the use of registration of the such called "Olfactory marks" as a tendency among national offices of trademark.
In the United States, Hasbro has a trademark for the smell of Play-Doh.


== References ==.
A suggestion of death, in law, refers to calling the death of a party to the attention of a court and making it a matter of record, as a step in the revival of an action abated by the death of a party.
In the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, it is governed by Fed. R. Civ. P. 25(a); it may be effected using Model Form 9.


== References ==.
Voluntary dismissal is termination of a lawsuit by voluntary request of the plaintiff (the party who originally filed the lawsuit).  A voluntary dismissal with prejudice (meaning the plaintiff is permanently barred from further litigating the same subject matter) is the modern descendant of the common law procedure known as retraxit.
In the United States, voluntary dismissal in Federal court is subject to Rule 41(a) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.  Rule 41(a)'s full text can be found below.  Simply stated, Rule 41(a) allows the plaintiff to make a dismissal as long as the defendant has not filed an answer or filed a motion for summary judgment. 
If the defendant has taken such action, dismissal is only proper under two circumstances:
a. all defendants stipulate to dismissal; or
b. the judge overseeing the case rules for the case to be dismissed
Once the case has been voluntarily dismissed, if it is brought to court again a dismissal in this second case will mean the case can never again be brought back to court.
If the defendant has a counterclaim, the case can only be dismissed if the counterclaim can still stand as its own case. 
Full text of Rule 41 (a) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure:
(a) Voluntary Dismissal: Effect Thereof

(1) By Plaintiff; By Stipulation.  Subject to the provisions of Rule 23(e), of Rule 66, and of any statute of the United States, an action may be dismissed by the plaintiff without order of court (i) by filing notice of dismissal at any time before service by the adverse party of an answer or of a motion for summary judgment, whichever first occurs, or (ii) by filing a stipulation of dismissal signed by all parties who have appeared in the action.  Unless otherwise stated in the notice of dismissal or stipulation, the dismissal is without prejudice, except that a notice of dismissal operates as an adjudication upon the  merits when filed by a plaintiff who has once dismissed in any court of the United States or of any state an action based on or including the same claim.
(2) By Order of Court.  Except as provided in paragraph (1) of this subdivision of this rule, an action shall not be dismissed at the plaintiff's instance save upon order of the court and upon such terms and conditions as the court deems proper.  If a counterclaim has been pleaded by a defendant prior to the service upon the defendant of the plaintiff's motion to dismiss, the action shall not be dismissed against the defendant's objections unless the counterclaim can remain pending for independent adjudication by the court.  Unless otherwise specified in the order, a dismissal under this paragraph is without prejudice.


== See also ==
Nolle prosequi


== References ==