Molecular biology /m…ôÀàl…õkj äl…ôr/ is a branch of biology that seeks to understand the molecular structures and chemical processes that are the basis of biological activity within and between cells. It is centered largely on the study of nucleic acids (such as DNA and RNA) and proteins. It examines the structure, function, and interactions of these macromolecules as they orchestrate processes such as replication, transcription, translation, protein synthesis, and complex biomolecular interactions. The field of molecular biology is multi-disciplinary, relying on principles from genetics, biochemistry, physics, mathematics, and more recently computer science (bioinformatics).[1][2][3]

Though cells and other microscopic structures had been observed in organisms as early as the 18th century, a detailed understanding of the mechanisms and interactions governing their behavior did not emerge until the 20th century, when technologies used in physics and chemistry had advanced sufficiently to permit their application in the biological sciences.[citation needed] The term 'molecular biology' was first used in 1945 by the English physicist William Astbury, who described it as an approach focused on discerning the underpinnings of biological phenomena‚Äîi.e. uncovering the physical and chemical structures and properties of biological molecules, as well as their interactions with other molecules and how these interactions explain observations of so-called classical biology, which instead studies biological processes at larger scales and higher levels of organization.[4] In 1953, Francis Crick, James Watson, Rosalind Franklin, and their colleagues at the Medical Research Council Unit, Cavendish Laboratory, were the first to describe the double helix model for the chemical structure of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), which is often considered a landmark event for the nascent field because it provided a physico-chemical basis by which to understand the previously nebulous idea of nucleic acids as the primary substance of biological inheritance. They proposed this structure based on previous research done by Franklin, which was conveyed to them by Maurice Wilkins and Max Perutz.[5] Their work led to the discovery of DNA in other microorganisms, plants, and animals.[6]

The field of molecular biology includes techniques which enable scientists to learn about molecular processes.[7] These techniques are used to efficiently target new drugs, diagnose disease, and better understand cell physiology.[8] Some clinical research and medical therapies arising from molecular biology are covered under gene therapy, whereas the use of molecular biology or molecular cell biology in medicine is now referred to as molecular medicine.[9]

Molecular biology sits at the intersection of biochemistry and genetics; as these scientific disciplines emerged and evolved in the 20th century, it became clear that they both sought to determine the molecular mechanisms which underlie vital cellular functions.[10][11] Advances in molecular biology have been closely related to the development of new technologies and their optimization.[12]

The field of genetics arose from attempts to understand the set of rules underlying reproduction and heredity, and the nature of the hypothetical units of heredity known as genes. Gregor Mendel pioneered this work in 1866, when he first described the laws of inheritance he observed in his studies of mating crosses in pea plants.[13] One such law of genetic inheritance is the law of segregation, which states that diploid individuals with two alleles for a particular gene will pass one of these alleles to their offspring.[14] Because of his critical work, the study of genetic inheritance is commonly referred to as Mendelian genetics.[15]

A major milestone in molecular biology was the discovery of the structure of DNA. This work began in 1869 by Friedrich Miescher, a Swiss biochemist who first proposed a structure called nuclein, which we now know to be (deoxyribonucleic acid), or DNA.[16] He discovered this unique substance by studying the components of pus-filled bandages, and noting the unique properties of the "phosphorus-containing substances".[17] Another notable contributor to the DNA model was Phoebus Levene, who proposed the "polynucleotide model" of DNA in 1919 as a result of his biochemical experiments on yeast.[18] In 1950, Erwin Chargaff expanded on the work of Levene and elucidated a few critical properties of nucleic acids: first, the sequence of nucleic acids varies across species.[19] Second, the total concentration of purines (adenine and guanine) is always equal to the total concentration of pyrimidines (cytosine and thymine).[16] This is now known as Chargaff's rule. In 1953, James Watson and Francis Crick published the double helical structure of DNA,[20] based on the X-ray crystallography work done by Rosalind Franklin which was conveyed to them by Maurice Wilkins and Max Perutz.[5] Watson and Crick described the structure of DNA and conjectured about the implications of this unique structure for possible mechanisms of DNA replication.[20] Watson and Crick were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1962, along with Wilkins, for proposing a model of the structure of DNA.[6]

In 1961, it was demonstrated that when a gene encodes a protein, three sequential bases of a gene's DNA specify each successive amino acid of the protein.[21] Thus the genetic code is a triplet code, where each triplet (called a codon) specifies a particular amino acid. Furthermore, it was shown that the codons do not overlap with each other in the DNA sequence encoding a protein, and that each sequence is read from a fixed starting point. During 1962‚Äì1964, through the use of conditional lethal mutants of a bacterial virus,[22] fundamental advances were made in our understanding of the functions and interactions of the proteins employed in the machinery of DNA replication, DNA repair, DNA recombination, and in the assembly of molecular structures.[23]

In 1928, Frederick Griffith, encountered a virulence property in pneumococcus bacteria, which was killing lab rats. According to Mendel, prevalent at that time, gene transfer could occur only from parent to daughter cells. Griffith advanced another theory, stating that gene transfer occurring in member of same generation is known as horizontal gene transfer (HGT). This phenomenon is now referred to as genetic transformation.[24]

Griffith's experiment addressed the pneumococcus bacteria, which had two different strains, one virulent and smooth and one avirulent and rough. The smooth strain had glistering appearance owing to the presence of a type of specific polysaccharide ‚Äì a polymer of glucose and glucuronic acid capsule. Due to this polysaccharide layer of bacteria, a host's immune system cannot recognize the bacteria and it kills the host. The rough strain lacks this polysaccharide capsule, resulting in a dull, rough colony appearance and making it avirulent because it is more readily recognized and destroyed by the host immune system.[25]

Presence or absence of capsule in the strain, is known to be genetically determined. Smooth and rough strains occur in several different type such as S-I, S-II, S-III, etc. and R-I, R-II, R-III, etc. respectively. All this subtypes of S and R bacteria differ with each other in antigen type they produce.[6]

The Avery‚ÄìMacLeod‚ÄìMcCarty experiment was an experimental demonstration by Oswald Avery, Colin MacLeod, and Maclyn McCarty that, in 1944, reported that DNA is the substance that causes bacterial transformation, in an era when it had been widely believed that it was proteins that served the function of carrying genetic information (with the very word protein itself coined to indicate a belief that its function was primary). It was the culmination of research in the 1930s and early 20th century at the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research to purify and characterize the "transforming principle" responsible for the transformation phenomenon first described in Griffith's experiment of 1928: killed Streptococcus pneumoniae of the virulent strain type III-S, when injected along with living but non-virulent type II-R pneumococci, resulted in a deadly infection of type III-S pneumococci. In their paper "Studies on the Chemical Nature of the Substance Inducing Transformation of Pneumococcal Types: Induction of Transformation by a Desoxyribonucleic Acid Fraction Isolated from Pneumococcus Type III", published in the February 1944 issue of the Journal of Experimental Medicine, Avery and his colleagues suggest that DNA, rather than protein as widely believed at the time, may be the hereditary material of bacteria, and could be analogous to genes and/or viruses in higher organisms.[26][27]

Confirmation that DNA is the genetic material which is cause of infection came from the Hershey‚ÄìChase experiment. They used E.coli and bacteriophage for the experiment. This experiment is also known as blender experiment, as kitchen blender was used as a major piece of apparatus. Alfred Hershey and Martha Chase demonstrated that the DNA injected by a phage particle into a bacterium contains all information required to synthesize progeny phage particles. They used radioactivity to tag the bacteriophage's protein coat with radioactive sulfur and DNA with radioactive phosphorus, into two different test tubes respectively. After mixing bacteriophage and E.coli into the test tube, the incubation period starts in which phage transforms the genetic material in the E.coli cells. Then the mixture is blended or agitated, which separates the phage from E.coli cells. The whole mixture is centrifuged and the pellet which contains E.coli cells was checked and the supernatant was discarded. The E.coli cells showed radioactive phosphorus, which indicated that the transformed material was DNA not the protein coat.

The transformed DNA gets attached to the DNA of E.coli and radioactivity is only seen onto the bacteriophage's DNA. This mutated DNA can be passed to the next generation and the theory of Transduction came into existence. Transduction is a process in which the bacterial DNA carry the fragment of bacteriophages and pass it on the next generation. This is also a type of horizontal gene transfer.[6]

The Meselson‚ÄìStahl experiment is an experiment by Matthew Meselson and Franklin Stahl in 1958 which supported Watson and Crick's hypothesis that DNA replication was semiconservative. In semiconservative replication, when the double-stranded DNA helix is replicated, each of the two new double-stranded DNA helices consisted of one strand from the original helix and one newly synthesized. It has been called "the most beautiful experiment in biology".[28] Meselson and Stahl decided the best way to trace the parent DNA would be to tag them by changing one of its atoms. Since nitrogen is present in all of the DNA bases, they generated parent DNA containing a heavier isotope of nitrogen than would be present naturally. This altered mass allowed them to determine how much of the parent DNA was present in the DNA after successive cycles of replication.

In the early 2020s, molecular biology entered a golden age defined by both vertical and horizontal technical development. Vertically, novel technologies are allowing for real-time monitoring of biological processes at the atomic level.[29] Molecular biologists today have access to increasingly affordable sequencing data at increasingly higher depths, facilitating the development of novel genetic manipulation methods in new non-model organisms. Likewise, synthetic molecular biologists will drive the industrial production of small and macro molecules through the introduction of exogenous metabolic pathways in various prokaryotic and eukaryotic cell lines.[30]

Horizontally, sequencing data is becoming more affordable and used in many different scientific fields. This will drive the development of industries in developing nations and increase accessibility to individual researchers. Likewise, CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing experiments can now be conceived and implemented by individuals for under $10,000 in novel organisms, which will drive the development of industrial and medical applications.[31]

The following list describes a viewpoint on the interdisciplinary relationships between molecular biology and other related fields.[32]

Molecular biology is the study of the molecular underpinnings of the biological phenomena, focusing on molecular synthesis, modification, mechanisms and interactions.
Biochemistry is the study of the chemical substances and vital processes occurring in living organisms. Biochemists focus heavily on the role, function, and structure of biomolecules such as proteins, lipids, carbohydrates and nucleic acids.[33]
Genetics is the study of how genetic differences affect organisms. Genetics attempts to predict how mutations, individual genes and genetic interactions can affect the expression of a phenotype[34]
While researchers practice techniques specific to molecular biology, it is common to combine these with methods from genetics and biochemistry. Much of molecular biology is quantitative, and recently a significant amount of work has been done using computer science techniques such as bioinformatics and computational biology. Molecular genetics, the study of gene structure and function, has been among the most prominent sub-fields of molecular biology since the early 2000s. Other branches of biology are informed by molecular biology, by either directly studying the interactions of molecules in their own right such as in cell biology and developmental biology, or indirectly, where molecular techniques are used to infer historical attributes of populations or species, as in fields in evolutionary biology such as population genetics and phylogenetics. There is also a long tradition of studying biomolecules "from the ground up", or molecularly, in biophysics.[35]

Molecular cloning is used to isolate and then transfer a DNA sequence of interest into a plasmid vector.[36] This recombinant DNA technology was first developed in the 1960s.[37] In this technique, a DNA sequence coding for a protein of interest is cloned using polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and/or restriction enzymes, into a plasmid (expression vector). The plasmid vector usually has at least three distinctive features: an origin of replication, a multiple cloning site (MCS), and a selective marker (usually antibiotic resistance). Additionally, upstream of the MCS are the promoter regions and the transcription start site, which regulate the expression of cloned gene.

This plasmid can be inserted into either bacterial or animal cells. Introducing DNA into bacterial cells can be done by transformation via uptake of naked DNA, conjugation via cell-cell contact or by transduction via viral vector. Introducing DNA into eukaryotic cells, such as animal cells, by physical or chemical means is called transfection. Several different transfection techniques are available, such as calcium phosphate transfection, electroporation, microinjection and liposome transfection. The plasmid may be integrated into the genome, resulting in a stable transfection, or may remain independent of the genome and expressed temporarily, called a transient transfection.[38][39]

DNA coding for a protein of interest is now inside a cell, and the protein can now be expressed. A variety of systems, such as inducible promoters and specific cell-signaling factors, are available to help express the protein of interest at high levels. Large quantities of a protein can then be extracted from the bacterial or eukaryotic cell. The protein can be tested for enzymatic activity under a variety of situations, the protein may be crystallized so its tertiary structure can be studied, or, in the pharmaceutical industry, the activity of new drugs against the protein can be studied.[40]

Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is an extremely versatile technique for copying DNA. In brief, PCR allows a specific DNA sequence to be copied or modified in predetermined ways. The reaction is extremely powerful and under perfect conditions could amplify one DNA molecule to become 1.07 billion molecules in less than two hours. PCR has many applications, including the study of gene expression, the detection of pathogenic microorganisms, the detection of genetic mutations, and the introduction of mutations to DNA.[41] The PCR technique can be used to introduce restriction enzyme sites to ends of DNA molecules, or to mutate particular bases of DNA, the latter is a method referred to as site-directed mutagenesis. PCR can also be used to determine whether a particular DNA fragment is found in a cDNA library. PCR has many variations, like reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) for amplification of RNA, and, more recently, quantitative PCR which allow for quantitative measurement of DNA or RNA molecules.[42][43]

Recombinase polymerase amplification (RPA) is a single tube, isothermal alternative to the polymerase chain reaction (PCR).[1] By adding a reverse transcriptase enzyme to an RPA reaction, it can detect RNA as well as DNA, without the need for a separate step to produce cDNA.[2][3][4] Because it is isothermal, RPA can use much simpler equipment than PCR, which requires a thermal cycler. Operating best at temperatures of 37‚Äì42 ¬∞C and still working, albeit more slowly, at room temperature means RPA reactions can in theory be run quickly by simply holding a tube in the hand. This makes RPA an excellent candidate for developing low-cost, rapid, point-of-care molecular tests. An international quality assessment of molecular detection of Rift Valley fever virus performed as well as the best RT-PCR tests, detecting less concentrated samples missed by some PCR tests and an RT-LAMP test.[5] RPA was developed and launched by TwistDx Ltd. (formerly known as ASM Scientific Ltd), a biotechnology company based in Cambridge, UK.

The RPA process employs three core enzymes ‚Äì a recombinase, a single-stranded DNA-binding protein (SSB) and strand-displacing polymerase. Recombinases are capable of pairing oligonucleotide primers with homologous sequence in duplex DNA,[1] SSB bind to displaced strands of DNA and prevent the primers from being displaced, and the strand displacing polymerase begins DNA synthesis where the primer has bound to the target DNA.

By using two opposing primers, much like PCR, if the target sequence is indeed present, an exponential DNA amplification reaction is initiated. No other sample manipulation such as thermal or chemical melting is required to initiate amplification. At optimal temperatures (37‚Äì42 ¬∞C), the reaction progresses rapidly and results in specific DNA amplification from just a few target copies to detectable levels, typically within 10 minutes, for rapid detection of viral genomic DNA or RNA,[2][3][4][6][7][8] pathogenic bacterial genomic DNA,[9][10] as well as short length aptamer DNA.[11]

The three core RPA enzymes can be supplemented by further enzymes to provide extra functionality. Addition of exonuclease III allows the use of an exo probe for real-time, fluorescence detection akin to real-time PCR.[1] Addition of endonuclease IV means that an nfo probe can be used for lateral flow strip detection of successful amplification.[1][6][12] If a reverse transcriptase that works at 37‚Äì42 ¬∞C is added then RNA can be reverse transcribed and the cDNA produced amplified all in one step. Currently only the TwistAmp exo version of RPA is available with the reverse transcriptase included, although users can simply supplement other TwistAmp reactions with a reverse transcriptase to produce the same effect. As with PCR, all forms of RPA reactions can be multiplexed by the addition of further primer/probe pairs, allowing the detection of multiple analytes or an internal control in the same tube.

Relationship to other amplification techniques
RPA is one of several isothermal nucleic acid amplification techniques to be developed as a molecular diagnostic technique, frequently with the objective of simplifying the laboratory instrumentation required relative to PCR. A partial list of other isothermal amplification techniques include LAMP, NASBA, helicase-dependent amplification (HDA), and nicking enzyme amplification reaction (NEAR). The techniques differ in the specifics of primer design and reaction mechanism, and in some cases (like RPA) make use of cocktails of two or more enzymes. Like RPA, many of these techniques offer rapid amplification times with the potential for simplified instrumentation, and reported resistance to substances in unpurified samples that are known to inhibit PCR. With respect to amplification time, modern thermocyclers with rapid temperature ramps can reduce PCR amplification times to less than 30 minutes, particularly for short amplicons using dual-temperature cycling rather than the conventional three-temperature protocols.[13] In addition, the demands of sample prep (including lysis and extraction of DNA or RNA, if necessary) should be considered as part of the overall time and complexity inherent to the technique. These requirements vary according to the technique as well as to the specific target and sample type.

Compared to PCR, the guidelines for primer and probe design for RPA are less established, and may take a certain degree of trial and error, although recent results indicate that standard PCR primers can work as well.[14] The general principle of a discrete amplicon bounded by a forward and reverse primer with an (optional) internal fluorogenic probe is similar to PCR. PCR primers may be used directly in RPA, but their short length means that recombination rates are low and RPA will not be especially sensitive or fast. Typically 30‚Äì38 base primers are needed for efficient recombinase filament formation and RPA performance. This is in contrast to some other techniques such as LAMP which use a larger number of primers subject to additional design constraints. Although the original 2006 report of RPA describes a functional set of reaction components, the current (proprietary) formulation of the TwistAmp kit is "substantially different" [15] and is available only from the TwistDx supplier. This is in comparison to reaction mixtures for PCR which are available from many suppliers, or LAMP or NASBA for which the composition of the reaction mixture is freely published, allowing researchers to create their own customized "kits" from inexpensive ingredients.

Published scientific literature generally lacks detailed comparison of the performance of isothermal amplification techniques such as RPA, HDA, and LAMP relative to each other, often rather comparing a single isothermal technique to a "gold standard" PCR assay. This makes it difficult to judge the merits of these techniques independently from the claims of the manufacturers, inventors, or proponents. Furthermore, performance characteristics of any amplification technique are difficult to decouple from primer design: a "good" primer set for one target for RPA may give faster amplification or more sensitive detection than a "poor" LAMP primer set for the same target, but the converse may be true for different primer sets for a different target. An exception is a recent study comparing RT-qPCR, RT-LAMP, and RPA for detection of Schmallenberg virus and bovine viral diarrhea virus,[16] which effectively makes the point that each amplification technique has strengths and weaknesses, which may vary by the target, and that the properties of the available amplification techniques need to be evaluated in combination with the requirements for each application. As with PCR and any other amplification technique, there may be a publication bias, with poorly performing primer sets rarely deemed worthy of reporting.[citation needed]
Rolling circle replication (RCR) is a process of unidirectional nucleic acid replication that can rapidly synthesize multiple copies of circular molecules of DNA or RNA, such as plasmids, the genomes of bacteriophages, and the circular RNA genome of viroids. Some eukaryotic viruses also replicate their DNA or RNA via the rolling circle mechanism.

As a simplified version of natural rolling circle replication, an isothermal DNA amplification technique, rolling circle amplification was developed. The RCA mechanism is widely used in molecular biology and biomedical nanotechnology, especially in the field of biosensing (as a method of signal amplification).[1]

Rolling circle DNA replication is initiated by an initiator protein encoded by the plasmid or bacteriophage DNA, which nicks one strand of the double-stranded, circular DNA molecule at a site called the double-strand origin, or DSO. The initiator protein remains bound to the 5' phosphate end of the nicked strand, and the free 3' hydroxyl end is released to serve as a primer for DNA synthesis by DNA polymerase III. Using the unnicked strand as a template, replication proceeds around the circular DNA molecule, displacing the nicked strand as single-stranded DNA. Displacement of the nicked strand is carried out by a host-encoded helicase called PcrA (the abbreviation standing for plasmid copy reduced) in the presence of the plasmid replication initiation protein.

Continued DNA synthesis can produce multiple single-stranded linear copies of the original DNA in a continuous head-to-tail series called a concatemer. These linear copies can be converted to double-stranded circular molecules through the following process:

First, the initiator protein makes another nick in the DNA to terminate synthesis of the first (leading) strand. RNA polymerase and DNA polymerase III then replicate the single-stranded origin (SSO) DNA to make another double-stranded circle. DNA polymerase I removes the primer, replacing it with DNA, and DNA ligase joins the ends to make another molecule of double-stranded circular DNA.

As a summary, a typical DNA rolling circle replication has five steps:[2]

Circular dsDNA will be "nicked".
The 3' end is elongated using "unnicked" DNA as leading strand (template); 5' end is displaced.
Displaced DNA is a lagging strand and is made double stranded via a series of Okazaki fragments.
Replication of both "unnicked" and displaced ssDNA.
Displaced DNA circularizes.
Virology
Replication of viral DNA
Some DNA viruses replicate their genomic information in host cells via rolling circle replication. For instance, human herpesvirus-6 (HHV-6)(hibv) expresses a set of "early genes" that are believed to be involved in this process.[3] The long concatemers that result are subsequently cleaved between the pac-1 and pac-2 regions of HHV-6's genome by ribozymes when it is packaged into individual virions.[4]

Human Papillomavirus-16 (HPV-16) is another virus that employs rolling replication to produce progeny at a high rate. HPV-16 infects human epithelial cells and has a double stranded circular genome. During replication, at the origin, the E1 hexamer wraps around the single strand DNA and moves in the 3' to 5' direction. In normal bidirectional replication, the two replication proteins will disassociate at time of collision, but in HPV-16 it is believed that the E1 hexamer does not disassociate, hence leading to a continuous rolling replication. It is believed that this replication mechanism of HPV may have physiological implications into the integration of the virus into the host chromosome and eventual progression into cervical cancer.[5]

In addition, geminivirus also utilizes rolling circle replication as its replication mechanism. It is a virus that is responsible for destroying many major crops, such as cassava, cotton, legumes, maize, tomato and okra. The virus has a circular, single stranded, DNA that replicates in host plant cells. The entire process is initiated by the geminiviral replication initiator protein, Rep, which is also responsible for altering the host environment to act as part of the replication machinery. Rep is also strikingly similar to most other rolling replication initiator proteins of eubacteria, with the presence of motifs I, II, and III at is N terminus. During the rolling circle replication, the ssDNA of geminivirus is converted to dsDNA and Rep is then attached to the dsDNA at the origin sequence TAATATTAC. After Rep, along with other replication proteins, binds to the dsDNA it forms a stem loop where the DNA is then cleaved at the nanomer sequence causing a displacement of the strand. This displacement allows the replication fork to progress in the 3‚Äô to 5‚Äô direction which ultimately yields a new ssDNA strand and a concatameric DNA strand.[6]

Bacteriophage T4 DNA replication intermediates include circular and branched circular concatemeric structures.[7] These structures likely reflect a rolling circle mechanism of replication.

Loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) is a single-tube technique for the amplification of DNA[2] for diagnostic purposes and a low-cost alternative to detect certain diseases.[3] LAMP is an isothermal nucleic acid amplification technique. In contrast to the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technology, in which the reaction is carried out with a series of alternating temperature steps or cycles, isothermal amplification is carried out at a constant temperature, and does not require a thermal cycler. LAMP was invented in 1998 by Eiken Chemical Company in Tokyo.[1] Reverse transcription loop-mediated isothermal amplification (RT-LAMP) combines LAMP with a reverse transcription step to allow the detection of RNA.

In LAMP, the target sequence is amplified at a constant temperature of 60‚Äì65 ¬∞C (140‚Äì149 ¬∞F) using either two or three sets of primers and a polymerase like Bst Klenow fragment with high strand displacement activity in addition to a replication activity. Typically, four different primers are used to amplify six distinct regions on the target gene, which increases specificity. An additional pair of "loop primers" can further accelerate the reaction.[4] The amount of DNA produced in LAMP is considerably higher than PCR-based amplification.[1] Primer design could be performed using several programs, such as PrimerExplorer, MorphoCatcher,[5] and NEB LAMP Primer Design Tool. For the screening of conservative and species-specific nucleotide polymorphisms, in most diagnostics applications a combination of PrimerExplorer and MorphoCatcher is very useful, because it allows for the localization of species-specific nucleotides at 3'-ends of primers to enhance the specificity of reactions.

Detection
The amplification product can be detected via photometry, measuring the turbidity caused by magnesium pyrophosphate precipitate in solution as a byproduct of amplification.[7] This allows easy visualization by the naked eye or via simple photometric detection approaches for small volumes. The reaction can be followed in real-time either by measuring the turbidity[8] or by fluorescence using intercalating dyes such as SYTO 9.[9]

Dyes, such as SYBR green, can be used to create a visible color change that can be seen with the naked eye without the need for expensive equipment, or for a response that can more accurately be measured by instrumentation. Dye molecules intercalate or directly label the DNA, and in turn can be correlated with the number of copies initially present. Hence, LAMP can also be quantitative. In-tube detection of LAMP DNA amplification is possible using manganese loaded calcein which starts fluorescing upon complexation of manganese by pyrophosphate during in vitro DNA synthesis.[10] Another method for visual detection of the LAMP amplicons by the unaided eye was based on their ability to hybridize with complementary gold nanoparticle-bound (AuNP) single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) and thus prevent the normal red to purple-blue color change that would otherwise occur during salt-induced aggregation of the gold particles. So, a LAMP method combined with amplicon detection by AuNP can have advantages over other methods in terms of reduced assay time, amplicon confirmation by hybridization and use of simpler equipment (i.e., no need for a thermocycler, electrophoresis equipment or a UV trans-illuminator).[11][12]
pH-dependent dye indicators such as Phenol Red induce a color change from pink to yellow when the pH value of the reaction decreases upon DNA amplification.[13] Due to its pronounced color change, this is the most commonly used readout for RT-LAMP assays.[13] However, the pH-change dependent readout requires a weakly buffered reaction solution, which poses a great challenge when using crude sample inputs with variable pH.[13] A second colorimetric assay utilizes metal ion indicators such as hydroxynaphthol blue (HNB), which changes color from purple to blue upon a drop in free Mg2+ ions, which form a Mg-pyrophosphate precipitate upon DNA amplification.[13]

Uses and benefits
LAMP is a relatively new DNA amplification technique, which due to its simplicity, ruggedness, and low cost could provide major advantages. LAMP has the potential to be used as a simple screening assay in the field or at the point of care by clinicians.[14] Because LAMP is isothermal, which eradicates the need for expensive thermocyclers used in conventional PCR, it may be a particularly useful method for infectious disease diagnosis in low and middle income countries.[15] LAMP is widely being studied for detecting infectious diseases such as filariasis,[16] Zika Virus,[17] tuberculosis,[18] malaria,[19][20][21] sleeping sickness,[22] and SARS-CoV-2.[23][24] In developing regions, it has yet to be extensively validated for other common pathogens.[14]

LAMP has been observed to be less sensitive (more resistant) than PCR to inhibitors in complex samples such as blood, likely due to use of a different DNA polymerase (typically Bst ‚Äì Bacillus stearothermophilus ‚Äì DNA polymerase rather than Taq polymerase as in PCR). Several reports describe successful detection of pathogens from minimally processed samples such as heat-treated blood,[25][26] or in presence of clinical sample matrices.[27] This feature of LAMP may be useful in low-resource or field settings where a conventional DNA or RNA extraction prior to diagnostic testing may be impractical.

LAMP has also been used in helping identify body fluids. With its simplicity, researchers are able to test one or more samples with little hands on time which is helping cut down the time needed to get results. Researchers have also been able to add factors to make identification even more simple including metal-indicator dye and phenol red to be able to use a smartphone and the naked eye respectively to analyze the results.[28][29][30]

Limitations
LAMP is less versatile than PCR, the most well-established nucleic acid amplification technique. LAMP is useful primarily as a diagnostic or detection technique, but is not useful for cloning or many other molecular biology applications enabled by PCR. Because LAMP uses 4 (or 6) primers targeting 6 (or 8) regions within a fairly small segment of the genome, and because primer design is subject to numerous constraints, it is difficult to design primer sets for LAMP "by eye". Free, open-source[31] or commercial software packages are generally used to assist with LAMP primer design, although the primer design constraints mean there is less freedom to choose the target site than with PCR.

In a diagnostic application, this must be balanced against the need to choose an appropriate target (e.g., a conserved site in a highly variable viral genome, or a target that is specific for a particular strain of pathogen). Multiple degenerated sequences may be required to cover the different variant strains of the same species. A consequence of having such a cocktail of primers can be non-specific amplification in the late amplification.[citation needed]

Multiplexing approaches for LAMP are less developed than for PCR. The larger number of primers per target in LAMP increases the likelihood of primer-primer interactions for multiplexed target sets. The product of LAMP is a series of concatemers of the target region, giving rise to a characteristic "ladder" or banding pattern on a gel, rather than a single band as with PCR. Although this is not a problem when detecting single targets with LAMP, "traditional" (endpoint) multiplex PCR applications wherein identity of a target is confirmed by size of a band on a gel are not feasible with LAMP. Multiplexing in LAMP has been achieved by choosing a target region with a restriction site, and digesting prior to running on a gel, such that each product gives rise to a distinct size of fragment,[32] although this approach adds complexity to the experimental design and protocol.

The use of a strand-displacing DNA polymerase in LAMP also precludes the use of hydrolysis probes, e.g. TaqMan probes, which rely upon the 5'-3' exonuclease activity of Taq polymerase. An alternative real-time multiplexing approach based on fluorescence quenchers has been reported.[33]

SYBR green dye may be added to view LAMP in real-time. However, in the late amplification, primer-dimer amplification may contribute to a false positive signal. The use of inorganic pyrophosphatase in a SYBR reaction mix allows the use of melt analysis to distinguish correct amplification [34]

Although different mitigation strategies have been proposed for false-positive results in assays based on this method, nonspecific amplification due to various factors including the absence of temperature gating mechanisms is one of the major limitations of Loop-mediated isothermal amplification.[35][36]

Lastly, because LAMP requires maintained, elevated incubation temperatures (60‚Äì65 ¬∞C), some sort of heating mechanism, thermostat, and/or insulator is required (though not necessarily a thermal cycler). This requirement makes LAMP less ideally suited for in the field, point-of-care diagnostics which would ideally function at ambient temperature.[citation needed]

Research
RNase hybridization-assisted amplification (RHAM) integrates LAMP with RNase HII-mediated fluorescent reporting. This method employs a conventional LAMP primer set to exponentially amplify the target sequence, followed by the hybridization of a ribonucleotide-containing fluorescent probe to the amplification product. RNase HII then cleaves the probe, releasing a fluorescent signal that can be detected.[37][38]

DNA replication is the process by which a cell makes exact copies of its DNA.[1][2][3][4] This process occurs in all organisms and is essential to biological inheritance, cell division, and repair of damaged tissues. DNA replication ensures that each of the newly divided daughter cells receives its own copy of each DNA molecule.[5]

DNA most commonly occurs in double-stranded form, made up of two complementary strands held together by base pairing of the nucleotides comprising each strand. The two linear strands of a double-stranded DNA molecule typically twist together in the shape of a double helix.[6] During replication, the two strands are separated, and each strand of the original DNA molecule then serves as a template for the production of a complementary counterpart strand, a process referred to as semiconservative replication. As a result, each replicated DNA molecule is composed of one original DNA strand as well as one newly synthesized strand.[7] Cellular proofreading and error-checking mechanisms ensure near-perfect fidelity for DNA replication.[8][9]

DNA replication usually begins at specific locations known as origins of replication[10] which are scattered across the genome.[11] Unwinding of DNA at the origin is accommodated by enzymes known as helicases and results in replication forks growing bi-directionally from the origin. Numerous proteins are associated with the replication fork to help in the initiation and continuation of DNA synthesis. Most prominently, DNA polymerase synthesizes the new strands by incorporating nucleotides that complement the nucleotides of the template strand. DNA replication occurs during the S (synthesis) stage of interphase.[12]

DNA replication can also be performed in vitro (artificially, outside a cell).[13] DNA polymerases isolated from cells and artificial DNA primers can be used to start DNA synthesis at known sequences in a template DNA molecule. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR), ligase chain reaction (LCR), and transcription-mediated amplification (TMA) are all common examples of this technique. In March 2021, researchers reported evidence suggesting that a preliminary form of transfer RNA, a necessary component of translation (the biological synthesis of new proteins in accordance with the genetic code), could have been a replicator molecule itself in the early abiogenesis of primordial life.[14][15]

DNA is a double-stranded structure, with both strands coiled together to form the characteristic double helix. Each single strand of DNA is a chain of four types of nucleotides. Nucleotides in DNA contain a deoxyribose sugar, a phosphate, and a nucleobase. The four types of nucleotide correspond to the four nucleobases: adenine, cytosine, guanine, and thymine, commonly abbreviated as A, C, G, and T, respectively. Adenine and guanine are purine[16] nucleobases, while cytosine and thymine are pyrimidines. These nucleotides form phosphodiester bonds, creating phosphate-deoxyribose backbone of the DNA double helix with the nucleobases pointing inward (i.e., toward the opposing strand). Complementary nucleobases are matched between strands through hydrogen bonds to form base pairs. Adenine pairs with thymine (two hydrogen bonds), and guanine pairs with cytosine (three hydrogen bonds).[17]

DNA strands have a directionality, and the different ends of a single strand are called the "3‚Ä≤ (three-prime) end" and the "5‚Ä≤ (five-prime) end". By convention, if the base sequence of a single strand of DNA is given, the left end of the sequence is the 5‚Ä≤ end, while the right end of the sequence is the 3‚Ä≤ end. The strands of the double helix are anti-parallel, with one being 5‚Ä≤ to 3‚Ä≤, and the opposite strand 3‚Ä≤ to 5‚Ä≤. These terms refer to the chemical convention of numbering the carbon atoms comprising the deoxyribose molecule and indicate the specific carbon atom to which the next phosphate in the chain attaches. Directionality has consequences in DNA synthesis, because DNA polymerase can synthesize DNA in only one direction by adding nucleotides to the 3‚Ä≤ end of a DNA strand.[18]

The pairing of complementary bases in DNA (through hydrogen bonding) means that the information contained within each strand is redundant. Phosphodiester (intra-strand) bonds are stronger than hydrogen (inter-strand) bonds. The actual job of the phosphodiester bonds is to connect the 5' carbon atom of one nucleotide to the 3' carbon atom of another nucleotide, while the hydrogen bonds stabilize DNA double helices across the helix axis but not in the direction of the longitudinal axis.[19] This makes it possible to separate the strands from one another. The nucleotides on a single strand can therefore be used to reconstruct nucleotides on a newly synthesized partner strand.[20]

Transcription-translation coupling is a mechanism of gene expression regulation in which synthesis of an mRNA (transcription) is affected by its concurrent decoding (translation). In prokaryotes, mRNAs are translated while they are transcribed. This allows communication between RNA polymerase, the multisubunit enzyme that catalyzes transcription, and the ribosome, which catalyzes translation. Coupling involves both direct physical interactions between RNA polymerase and the ribosome ("expressome" complexes), as well as ribosome-induced changes to the structure and accessibility of the intervening mRNA that affect transcription ("attenuation" and "polarity").[1][2][3]

Significance
Bacteria depend on transcription-translation coupling for genome integrity, termination of transcription and control of mRNA stability. Consequently, artificial disruption of transcription-translation coupling impairs the fitness of bacteria. Without coupling, genome integrity is compromised as stalled transcription complexes interfere with DNA replication and induce DNA breaks.[4] Lack of coupling produces premature transcription termination, likely due to increased binding of termination factor Rho.[5] Degradation of prokaryotic mRNAs is accelerated by loss of coupled translation due to increased availability of target sites of RNase E.[6] It has also been suggested that coupling of transcription with translation is an important mechanism of preventing formation of deleterious R-loops.[7] While transcription-translation coupling is likely prevalent across prokaryotic organisms, not all species are dependent on it. Unlike Escherichia coli, in Bacillus subtilis transcription significantly outpaces translation, and coupling consequently does not occur.[8]

Mechanisms
Translation promotes transcription elongation and regulates transcription termination. Functional coupling between transcription and translation is caused by direct physical interactions between the ribosome and RNA polymerase ("expressome complex"), ribosome-dependent changes to nascent mRNA secondary structure which affect RNA polymerase activity (e.g. "attenuation"), and ribosome-dependent changes to nascent mRNA availability to transcription termination factor Rho ("polarity").

Expressome complex
The expressome is a supramolecular complex consisting of RNA polymerase and a trailing ribosome linked by a shared mRNA transcript. It is supported by the transcription factors NusG and NusA, which interact with both RNA polymerase and the ribosome to couple the complexes together.[9][10][11] When coupled by transcription factor NusG, the ribosome binds newly synthesized mRNA and prevents formation of secondary structures that inhibit transcription.[9] Formation of an expressome complex also aids transcription elongation by the trailing ribosome opposing back-tracking of RNA polymerase.[12][13] Three-dimensional models of ribosome-RNA polymerase expressome complexes have been determined by cryo-electron microscopy.[14][10][11][9]

Ribosome-mediated attenuation
Ribosome-mediated attenuation is a gene expression mechanism in which a transcriptional termination signal is regulated by translation.[15][16][17] Attenuation occurs at the start of some prokaryotic operons at sequences called "attenuators", which have been identified in operons encoding amino acid biosynthesis enzymes, pyrimidine biosynthesis enzymes and antibiotic resistance factors. The attenuator functions via a set of mRNA sequence elements that coordinate the status of translation to a transcription termination signal:

A short open reading frame encoding a "leader peptide"
A transcription pause sequence
A "control region"
A transcription termination signal
Once the start of the leader open reading frame has been transcribed, RNA polymerase pauses due to folding of the nascent mRNA. This programmed arrest of transcription gives time for translation of the leader peptide to commence, and transcription to resume once coupled to translation. The downstream "control region" then modulates the elongation rate of either the ribosome or RNA polymerase. The factor determining this depends on the function of the downstream genes (e.g. the operon encoding enzymes involved in the synthesis of histidine contains a series of histidine codons is the control region). The role of the control region is to modulate whether transcription remains coupled to translation depending on the cellular state (e.g. a low availability of histidine slows translation leading to uncoupling, while high availability of histidine permits efficient translation and maintains coupling). Finally, the transcription terminator sequence is transcribed. Whether transcription is coupled to translation determines whether this stops transcription. The terminator requires folding of the mRNA, and by unwinding mRNA structures the ribosome elects the formation of either of two alternative structures: the terminator, or a competing fold termed the "antiterminator".

For amino acid biosynthesis operons, these allow the gene expression machinery to sense the abundance of the amino acid produced by the encoded enzymes, and adjust the level of downstream gene expression accordingly: transcription occurring only if the amino acid abundance is low and the demand for the enzymes is therefore high. Examples include the histidine (his)[18][19] and tryptophan (trp)[20] biosynthetic operons.

The term "attenuation" was introduced to describe the his operon.[18] While it is typically used to describe biosynthesis operons of amino acids and other metabolites, programmed transcription termination that does not occur at the end of a gene was first identified in Œª phage.[21] The discovery of attenuation was significant as it represented a regulatory mechanism distinct from repression.[22][23] The trp operon is regulated by both attenuation and repression, and was the first evidence that gene expression regulation mechanisms can be overlapping or redundant.[17]

Polarity
"Polarity" is a gene expression mechanism in which transcription terminates prematurely due to a loss of coupling between transcription and translation. Transcription outpaces translation when the ribosome pauses[citation needed] or encounters a premature stop codon.[24] This allows the transcription termination factor Rho to bind the mRNA and terminate mRNA synthesis. Consequently, genes that are downstream in the operon are not transcribed, and therefore not expressed. Polarity serves as mRNA quality control, allowing unused transcripts to be terminated prematurely, rather than synthesized and degraded.[25]

The term "polarity" was introduced to describe the observation that the order of genes within an operon is important: a nonsense mutation within an upstream gene effects the transcription of downstream genes.[24] Furthermore, the position of the nonsense mutation within the upstream gene modulates the "degree of polarity", with nonsense mutations at the start of the upstream genes exerting stronger polarity (more reduced transcription) on downstream genes.

Unlike the mechanism of attenuation, which involves intrinsic termination of transcription at well-defined programmed sites, polarity is Rho-dependent and termination occurs at variable position.

Discovery
The potential for transcription and translation to regulate each other was recognized by the team of Marshall Nirenberg, who discovered that the processes are physically connected through the formation of a DNA-ribosome complex.[26][27] As part of the efforts of Nirenberg's group to determine the genetic code that underlies protein synthesis, they pioneered the use of cell-free in vitro protein synthesis reactions. Analysis of these reactions revealed that protein synthesis is mRNA-dependent, and that the sequence of the mRNA strictly defines the sequence of the protein product. For this work in breaking in the genetic code, Nirenberg was jointly awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1968. Having established that transcription and translation are linked biochemically (translation depends on the product of transcription), an outstanding question remained whether they were linked physically - whether the newly synthesized mRNA released from the DNA before it is translated, or if can translation occur concurrently with transcription. Electron micrographs of stained cell-free protein synthesis reactions revealed branched assemblies in which strings of ribosomes are linked to a central DNA fibre.[27] DNA isolated from bacterial cells co-sediment with ribosomes, further supporting the conclusion that transcription and translation occur together.[26] Direct contact between ribosomes and RNA polymerase are observable within these early micrographs.[3] The potential for simultaneous regulation of transcription and translation at this junction was noted in Nirenberg's work as early as 1964.[26]

Protein biosynthesis, or protein synthesis, is a core biological process, occurring inside cells, balancing the loss of cellular proteins (via degradation or export) through the production of fresh proteins. Proteins perform a number of critical functions as enzymes, structural proteins or hormones. Protein synthesis is a very similar process for both prokaryotes and eukaryotes but there are some distinct differences.[1]

Protein synthesis can be divided broadly into two phases: transcription and translation. During transcription, a section of DNA encoding a protein, known as a gene, is converted into a molecule called messenger RNA (mRNA). This conversion is carried out by enzymes, known as RNA polymerases, in the nucleus of the cell.[2] In eukaryotes, this mRNA is initially produced in a premature form (pre-mRNA) which undergoes post-transcriptional modifications to produce mature mRNA. The mature mRNA is exported from the cell nucleus via nuclear pores to the cytoplasm of the cell for translation to occur. During translation, the mRNA is read by ribosomes which use the nucleotide sequence of the mRNA to determine the sequence of amino acids. The ribosomes catalyze the formation of covalent peptide bonds between the encoded amino acids to form a polypeptide chain.[3]

Following translation the polypeptide chain must fold to form a functional protein; for example, to function as an enzyme the polypeptide chain must fold correctly to produce a functional active site. To adopt a functional three-dimensional shape, the polypeptide chain must first form a series of smaller underlying structures called secondary structures. The polypeptide chain in these secondary structures then folds to produce the overall 3D tertiary structure. Once correctly folded, the protein can undergo further maturation through different post-translational modifications, which can alter the protein's ability to function, its location within the cell (e.g. cytoplasm or nucleus) and its ability to interact with other proteins.[4]

Protein biosynthesis has a key role in disease as changes and errors in this process, through underlying DNA mutations or protein misfolding, are often the underlying causes of a disease. DNA mutations change the subsequent mRNA sequence, which then alters the mRNA encoded amino acid sequence. Mutations can cause the polypeptide chain to be shorter by generating a stop sequence which causes early termination of translation. Alternatively, a mutation in the mRNA sequence changes the specific amino acid encoded at that position in the polypeptide chain. This amino acid change can impact the protein's ability to function or to fold correctly.[5] Misfolded proteins have a tendency to form dense protein clumps, which are often implicated in diseases, particularly neurological disorders including Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease.[6]

CRISPR gene editing (/Ààkr…™sp…ôr/; pronounced like "crisper"; an abbreviation for "clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats") is a genetic engineering technique in molecular biology by which the genomes of living organisms may be modified. It is based on a simplified version of the bacterial CRISPR-Cas9 antiviral defense system. By delivering the Cas9 nuclease complexed with a synthetic guide RNA (gRNA) into a cell, the cell's genome can be cut at a desired location, allowing existing genes to be removed or new ones added in vivo("within the living").[1]

The technique is considered highly significant in biotechnology and medicine as it enables in vivo genome editing and is considered exceptionally precise, cost-effective, and efficient. It can be used in the creation of new medicines, agricultural products, and genetically modified organisms, or as a means of controlling pathogens and pests. It also offers potential in the treatment of inherited genetic diseases as well as diseases arising from somatic mutations, such as cancer. However, its use in human germline genetic modification is highly controversial. The development of this technique earned Jennifer Doudna and Emmanuelle Charpentier the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 2020.[2][3] The third researcher group that shared the Kavli Prize for the same discovery,[4] led by Virginijus ≈Ýik≈°nys, was not awarded the Nobel Prize.[5][6][7]

Working like genetic scissors, the Cas9 nuclease opens both strands of the targeted DNA sequence to introduce the modification by one of two methods. Knock-in mutations, facilitated via homology-directed repair (HDR), are the traditional pathway of targeted genomic editing approaches.[1] This allows for the introduction of targeted DNA damage and repair. HDR employs the use of similar DNA sequences to drive the repair of the break via the incorporation of exogenous DNA to function as the repair template.[1] This method relies on the periodic and isolated occurrence of DNA damage at the target site in order for the repair to commence. Knock-out mutations caused by CRISPR-Cas9 result from the repair of the double-stranded break by means of non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) or POLQ/polymerase theta-mediated end-joining (TMEJ). These end-joining pathways can often result in random deletions or insertions at the repair site, which may disrupt or alter gene functionality. Therefore, genomic engineering with CRISPR-Cas9 enables researchers to generate targeted random gene disruption.

While genome editing in eukaryotic cells has been possible using various methods since the 1980s, the methods employed have proven to be inefficient and impractical for large-scale implementation. With the discovery of CRISPR and specifically the Cas9 nuclease molecule, efficient and highly selective editing became possible. Cas9, derived from the bacterial species Streptococcus pyogenes, has facilitated targeted genomic modification in eukaryotic cells by enabling a reliable method of creating a targeted break at a specific location as designated by the crRNA and tracrRNA guide strands.[8] Researchers can insert Cas9 and template RNA with ease in order to silence or cause point mutations at specific loci. This has proven invaluable for quick and efficient mapping of genomic models and biological processes associated with various genes in a variety of eukaryotes. Newly engineered variants of the Cas9 nuclease that significantly reduce off-target activity have been developed.[9]

CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing techniques have many potential applications. The use of the CRISPR-Cas9-gRNA complex for genome editing[10] was the AAAS's choice for Breakthrough of the Year in 2015.[11] Since 2015, CRISPR has been experimentally investigated on non-viable human embryos.[12] In 2019, the first humans were born from genome-edited embryos using the CRISPR technique, as a result of the controversial He Jiankui affair.[13] Several bioethical concerns have been raised about the prospect of using CRISPR for germline editing, especially the potential enabling of human eugenics.[14] In 2023, the first drug making use of CRISPR gene editing, Exagamglogene autotemcel, sold under the brand name "Casgevy", was officially approved for use in the United Kingdom, to cure sickle-cell disease and beta thalassemia.[15][16] On 2 December 2023, the Kingdom of Bahrain became the second country in the world to approve the use of Casgevy to treat sickle-cell anemia and beta thalassemia.[17][18] On December 8, 2023, Casgevy received approval for use in the United States by the Food and Drug Administration.[19]

History
Other methods
In the early 2000s, German researchers began developing zinc finger nucleases (ZFNs), synthetic proteins whose DNA-binding domains enable them to create double-stranded breaks in DNA at specific points. ZFNs have a higher precision and the advantage of being smaller than Cas9, but ZFNs are not as commonly used as CRISPR-based methods. In 2010, synthetic nucleases called transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs) provided an easier way to target a double-stranded break to a specific location on the DNA strand. Both zinc finger nucleases and TALENs require the design and creation of a custom protein for each targeted DNA sequence, which is a much more difficult and time-consuming process than that of designing guide RNAs. CRISPRs are much easier to design because the process requires synthesizing only a short RNA sequence, a procedure that is already widely used for many other molecular biology techniques (e.g., creating oligonucleotide primers).[20]

Whereas methods such as RNA interference (RNAi) do not fully suppress gene function, CRISPR, ZFNs, and TALENs provide full, irreversible gene knockout.[21] CRISPR can also target several DNA sites simultaneously simply by introducing different gRNAs. In addition, the costs of employing CRISPR are relatively low.[21][22][23]